PAGE_TITLE: 
	What Will ‘the Ties That Bind’ Look like After COVID? | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Our AEI
colleague, Yuval Levin recently
published
an
article in Commentary Magazine exploring how the COVID-19 moment might affect
social solidarity. Will it lead to increased cohesion or fuel polarization?
Yuval points out that it is too early to know —
a function of what another AEI scholar, Nicholas Eberstadt, has called
the
“fog of war.”
As
pattern-seeking primates, we are nonetheless compelled to speculate.
It is likely
that the economic impacts of the pandemic will reverberate for years. More than
30 million new unemployment claims have been filed in the past six weeks,
resulting in a potential unemployment rate in the mid- to high-teens. Some
analysts
have suggested
unemployment
might not drop below 10 percent until the end of 2021. This “recession of
choice” was the trade-off for slowing the spread of the disease and protecting
the capacity of the health system. Essentially, we are paying people to stay
six feet apart. While relatively easy to shut down, rebuilding the organic and
complex web of exchange we call “the economy” will be far more difficult.
Various federal stimulus initiatives will keep many businesses alive in an
induced coma. Others businesses simply won’t make it. Fragile supply chains
will have to rebuild themselves in adverse circumstances.
This means
there will be potentially millions of Americans seeking new jobs simultaneously
in an uncertain job market as state governors begin to slowly open up their
economies. As
other nations
are
showing us, it seems far more likely that our economic recovery follows a
gradual “U”-shaped shape rather than the “V” rebound initially hoped for.
Uncertainty will be increased as governors open and close state, regional and
local economies to deal with COVID-19 flare-ups. This will rattle business
leaders, workers, and investors and stress public systems (e.g., unemployment
insurance, workforce development and job training, mass transit) forced to cope
with on-again, off-again economic conditions.
Another big unknown is how the experience and
presence of COVID-19 is likely to impact work itself. Democrats in Congress are
already pushing expanded Occupational Health and Safety Administration powers
to establish mandatory standards for COVID-related workplace safety. As with
every other regulatory push, there’s danger of government going too far and
imposing unnecessarily stringent conditions that act as barriers for business
start-ups and expansions. Since “safety” can justify almost anything, such
policies will be hard to resist — especially if a more regulation-friendly
president and administration are installed. Under-shooting on workplace safety
is a recipe for a different disaster that feeds the epidemic and heightens
social tensions between essential and non-essential workers.
The professions will also likely change with
ongoing need for social distancing and modified office practices to contain and
reduce viral infections. Will the much-loathed (by employees) “open” office
plan survive? Millions of workers are entering their sixth week of telework.
Some of them will develop new life rhythms that will be difficult to forget
(and leave), ever more so as the weeks of telecommuting lengthen. Employers are
likely to identify certain benefits as well, such as how work-from-home may
improve corporate resiliency to natural disasters, cut back on exposure to
illness that lead to sick-time, and reduce the need for expensive office space.
Other legacy practices that have marked employment for years — carefully
monitored 9 to 5 schedules, in-person meetings, and regular travel — may seem
increasingly antiquated and superfluous as workers and
employers discover
they
can both skip the commute and improve productivity with Zoom. Advances in
internet communications technology, including “
hologram
meetings
” will continue to drain the “virtual” out of virtual
reality. What happens when these technologies and practices move from being
temporary responses to COVID-19 to being preferable to workers and employers?
Moving work back home, a common experience in
the pre-industrial era, might have downstream effects on the role of work in
meeting social needs. For the better part of 50 years, the decline of civil
society has been widely lamented most memorably, in Robert Putnam’s
formulation, as “bowling alone.” People, however, did not cease to be sociable
— they simply aimed their social instincts elsewhere. For many, television,
gaming, social media, and, to a large extent, work, have become alternate forms
of community and social interaction replacing the close, personal contact of
religious communities, fraternal organizations, softball leagues and civic
groups.
To some degree, this hollowing out of social and
community life is related to increased commitments to work. The
average hours
worked
of prime-age, wage-earning American adults have increased since the late 1970s,
leveling off for most workers in the early 2000s. This increase in work hours has
held particularly true for women and
high-income,
college-educated
men. A
2014 Gallup poll
found
that full-time American workers work 47 hours per week on average, a remarkably
high number among wealthy nations that has held constant in Gallup surveys
since at least 2001. Long work hours coupled with
lengthening
commutes
necessarily leave less time for family, neighborhood,
and community. The fact that these trends have coincided with social ennui and
the ongoing breakdown of the family suggests these negatives may be part of the
price-tag of extra work denominated in social health and well-being.
There is at least some hope that a new work
landscape might also produce a new “community-work equilibrium.”
Shelter-in-place rules have forced many families and roommates to spend more
time together over the last few weeks than they otherwise would have spent in a
year. Or two years. Next-door activity has exploded as neighbors do more casual
checking in to see how others are doing and offer assistance and simple
comforts like food. Churches and other religious communities have innovated to
maintain connections with online prayer and social gatherings. Even the
cocktail hour
has
moved online. Zoom and FaceTime have provided platforms not only for work meetings
but also for reaching out to long-neglected relationships on otherwise
uneventful evenings. The combination of a less frenetic work life and renewed
emphasis on other forms of social relationship may harden into new ties that
bind us — but in a different way than before. We’ll have to wait and see. And
hope.