PAGE_TITLE: 
	COVID-19 and Work | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

As the need for social distancing increases, the coronavirus
pandemic is raising questions we haven’t thought about before, many of them
related to employment and work.
For some of us, the danger of disease will be unavoidable: Our
jobs require us to be in a specific place at a specific time collaborating with
co-workers and providing vital services to the public. This includes everyone
from healthcare workers to grocery clerks. Others will find their jobs
curtailed or suspended as the public reduces consumption, and they will require
support from government and civil society to survive. People working in
hospitality, entertainment, travel, and non-essential retail — millions of
Americans — may struggle to find any work at all. Members of the knowledge
economy are experiencing the challenges (and benefits) of full-time
telecommuting, including the social isolation that comes with it.
Coronavirus is reshaping how we work, and the big question
now is what the federal government is doing to help workers and businesses that
are being displaced by the growing shut-down of business activity across the
US. Some highlights include:
Unemployment
Insurance
The US Department of Labor
issued guidance
earlier this week that expands the authority of states to provide unemployment insurance benefits to COVID-19 impacted workers. Under these guidelines, in addition to people who have been laid off, UI benefits are available if:
An employer temporarily ceases operations due to
COVID-19, preventing employees from coming to work;
An individual is quarantined with the
expectation of returning to work after the quarantine is over; and
An individual leaves employment due to a risk of
exposure or infection or to care for a family member
These flexibilities will likely be conditioned and administered differently depending on which state you live in. A link to DOL’s index of state unemployment insurance programs can be found
here
.
Meanwhile, Capitol Hill has been moving quickly to pass additional UI relief legislation. Under the Families First Coronavirus Response Act, passed yesterday by Congress, states will be permitted to waive job search requirements, waiting periods, and other conditions on receipt of benefits. The bill also provides increased funding to the states to manage the surge of individuals seeking UI benefits.
Via Twenty20
These UI-related policy changes, and much more, are likely to be critical in the coming weeks. According to a survey by UBS, a private wealth management firm,
24 percent of employers
responded they were likely to cut jobs in the coming months if the outbreak gets worse. On the brighter side, Amazon is advertising for
100,000 new positions
to meet the spike in demand for home deliveries of goods. Keep an eye
on DOL’s weekly report
on first-time UI applications for a sense of how the unemployment situation is developing, updated Thursdays at 8:30 am EST.
Paid Medical and
Family Leave
Families First has several other employment-related provisions
designed to cushion the impact of COVID-19:
Eligible full- and part-time employees are
entitled to two weeks of fully paid time off (up to $511 per day) to self-isolate
or for medical care. The benefit for part-time employees is scaled to reflect
their average work schedules (i.e., if an individual was working 25 hours per
week, they would receive a benefit of a fully-paid 25 hours). These benefits
are capped at $4,000 or two-thirds of the workers average monthly salary,
whichever is less.
Eligible full- and part-time employees are also entitled
to two weeks paid time off at two-thirds of their regular pay (up to $200 per
day) to
care for a family member or to
care for a child whose school has closed, or if their child care provider is
unavailable
due to COVID-19. As with the fully-paid time off, the benefit
for part-time employees is scaled to the average number of hours the individual
would have worked.
The mandate to provide these benefits applies to
all companies with 500 or fewer employees (note: 89 percent of large employers
already provide paid sick leave). The US Labor Department can waive the
requirement for companies with 50 or fewer employees where the burden of paid
leave is a threat to firm viability. The federal government will reimburse employers
for the cost of these benefits within 90 days.
The bill also expands access to nutrition assistance and increases support for state Medicaid programs. The Trump administration and Capitol Hill leaders are negotiating additional legislation to provide direct financial assistance to American households and further off-set the wages likely to be lost as the COVID-19 crisis unfolds.