PAGE_TITLE: 
	Criminal Neglect | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Yesterday’s
US Department of Justice report
on the state of Alabama’s prison system is nothing short of a horror. The conditions detailed in the report beggar the imagination, an impossible catalog of brutality, callous indifference, destruction, and death. In an era where the word has almost lost meaning, DOJ’s findings are truly an outrage.
How did this happen? Two graphs from the report tell much of tale. The first demonstrates the failure of the state of Alabama to adequately staff its prisons.
The state has authorized the hiring of up to 3,326 correctional officers but employs only 1,072. At the Holman Correctional Facility, a warden reported that she had 11 security staff per shift to supervise a prison population of 1800. Officers routinely work extreme levels of mandatory overtime (the state’s Orwellian term for this is “mandatory voluntary overtime”), and are so overworked that many are cited for sleeping on duty, including one officer who fell asleep on his feet and collapsed to the floor. In some cases, officers simply refuse to work the overtime and walk off the job leaving the prison in an even more precarious position. This mountain of extra work is also creating instances where officers are paid more than twice their base salary in overtime, totaling more than $31 million across the system.
When low levels of corrections staffing meets big prison populations (Alabama has the fifth highest adult and juvenile incarceration rate in the country, and the Alabama DOC currently operates at 165 percent of its capacity) the results are predictable: widespread and extreme violence including murder, assault, rape, and sexual assault. The trend in violence moves in almost perfect inverse with the staffing graph:
The specific examples of prisoner-on-prisoner violence do not bear repeating; no writer of slasher fiction could equal it. Suffice it to say the levels of violence in Alabama’s prisons should shock our consciences into demanding that Alabama and the federal government restore a minimum level of order, security, and safety in Alabama facilities. More investigations into prison conditions in other states with high levels of incarceration are warranted to determine whether the Alabama experience is an exception or commonplace.
“Re-entry” has been the mantra of the criminal justice reform movement for the past 15 years. It is now time, evidently, past time, to address prison conditions themselves as well as problems in probation and parole. We wonder why re-entry programs don’t stop recidivism. Given the level of violent trauma occurring behind bars, we should not be surprised.