PAGE_TITLE: 
	On the Front Porch with Brent Orrell and Tony Pipa: A Conversation with Keith Humphreys and Sally Satel | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

VIDEO
Event Summary
On July 8, AEI’s Brent Orrell hosted the fifth event in the “On the Front Porch” series with the Brookings Institution’s Tony Pipa. This event featured Stanford University Professor Keith Humphreys and AEI’s Sally Satel, two experts in opioid treatment and the societal effects of drug abuse in rural areas. After Mr. Orrell delivered introductions and opening remarks, Mr. Pipa and Mr. Orrell exchanged moderation duties, posing questions to Dr. Humphreys and Dr. Satel.
Dr. Humphreys and Dr. Satel discussed whether increased economic dislocation and declining civic and social participation create conditions that leave residents vulnerable to drugs. They argued concurrently that while much attention has been paid to the addictive and destructive power of opioids and their overprescription, policymakers have done much less to address the underlying social and economic conditions driving rural residents to use. Dr. Humphreys contended that economic development alone may be an insufficient solution, and Dr. Satel argued that education could provide a path toward personal and professional development in distressed areas. The event concluded with a Q&A.
—Hunter Dixon
Event Description
Contemporary rural-urban divisions in America stem from long-term demographic, economic, technological, and social factors. To examine these trends, AEI’s Brent Orrell and Tony Pipa of the Brookings Institution host an ongoing series of “On the Front Porch” conversations with authors of recent research on issues facing rural America.
On July 8, Mr. Orrell and Mr. Pipa will host AEI Senior Fellow Sally Satel and Stanford University Professor Keith Humphreys, experts on opioid use disorder and its impact on rural communities. Dr. Satel and Dr. Humphreys each have decades of experience researching mental health, behavior, and health and addiction policy. At this event, they will discuss the causes of and potential solutions to the nation’s drug epidemic, especially as that challenge presents in nonmetropolitan areas.