PAGE_TITLE: 
	Testimony | A Dynamic Economy Requires a Dynamic Workforce: Investing in Human Capital, Human Skill, and Human Work | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Mr.
Chairman and members of the committee, I am pleased to have the opportunity to
address the rapidly changing landscape of technological innovation, the trend
of automation, and the future of human work in the context of the ongoing
technological transformation of the economy.
There’s
an important and, I believe, somewhat neglected contextual framework to these issues.
What can we say with relative certainty about the changing skill demands of the
American economy?
For
decades, dating back to the Dwight D. Eisenhower administration, the focus of
government, business, education, and learners has been on increasing the supply
of the so-called STEM skills—science, technology, engineering, and math.
There’s no question that technical skills are vital in a high-technology
economy and that, despite all our effort, there is still substantial unmet
demand for individuals with these skills.
However, another parallel story has to be considered in shaping workforce development policy. According to an analysis of Census Bureau data by Harvard Professor David Deming, one of the effects of automation and technology has been to increase demand for workers who have both high levels of technical skill and, counterintuitively, high levels of social skills—the so-called “noncognitive” or soft skills. Wages follow a similar pattern, with the most robust wage growth going toward those who combine high technical and high social skills. These findings, I would add, are echoed when employers are asked what’s missing in the workforce: foundational skills such as communication, teamwork, critical thinking, collaboration, grit, and perseverance. Most employers will say they can train for technical skills but have far more difficulty training for the noncognitive skills.
Aside
from their immediate utility, noncognitive skills are important for another key
reason. Taken as a whole, they are a matrix of skills that support the
acquisition of new skills. In a world where employer skill demands can be
transformed seemingly overnight, this kind of flexibility and adaptability
represents the “master skills” of the 21st-century economy. These noncognitive
skills allow workers to pivot more easily into new jobs as automation
increasingly takes over routine, task-based skill sets.
The labor shortage associated with the recovery from the COVID-19 recession will likely accelerate demand for both high-tech and “master skills” going forward. Labor shortages and rising wages will increase the incentives for automation as firms seek to remain competitive both locally and globally. More automation means required skills will likely tilt even further toward skill sets that are more difficult to automate, those made up of non-routine tasks and tend to incorporate greater social and interpersonal agility. Workers who have those types of skills, as I noted earlier, will likely also be best prepared to adapt to the changes in skill demand that automation is bringing forth. Conversely, those who struggle with noncognitive skills will be at a disadvantage in finding work and keeping up with the pace of change. In light of an increasingly automated economy, the solution is not to attempt to constrain technological change or alter its course, but rather to build up the capacities of our workforce in both technical and noncognitive domains while technological change continues to run its course. Policymakers at all levels should emphasize noncognitive skill development through a variety of approaches to help increase the supply of these skills and help equip workers with the full portfolio of capacities they will need to thrive both today and in the future.
Read the full testimony here.