PAGE_TITLE: 
	Mandating the 4-day Workweek Is a ‘one-size-fits-none’ Policy | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

The last 18 months have shown that our traditional understanding of “office work” has been overdue for a rewrite. The COVID-19 health threat, much-allayed concerns about
remote work productivity
and improvements in communications technology have shown that
more flexible work arrangements
are within the grasp of American workers.
These conclusions could not be more timely. Data from a recent
American Enterprise Institute survey
shows that workers value flexibility in employment above virtually any other consideration: Workers want a better balance between their work and family lives, and they are willing to sacrifice financially, as much as
$30,000 per year
in salary, in order to get it.
Employee resistance
to return-to-office pressures, the use of flexible work arrangements as competitive enticements in the fight for talent between firms and
a historically high
“quit” rate mean that employers find themselves backfooted in this contest. Tech companies like Microsoft are leaning into more permanent
hybrid work models
to satisfy current employees and attract new talent. IBM is reimagining its recruitment strategies and training capacities to
expand its hiring pool
for in-demand positions. Market forces are moving us toward workplace practices that strike a better balance between business needs and the desire of employees to have more control over schedules and working locations.
Against this backdrop, proposals for mandating a four-day, 32-hour workweek have begun to emerge – a policy that would inhibit the worker-flexibility trend. Here’s why.
The U.S. workforce is 153 million strong, employing a diverse population with widely varying job types, skills and scheduling needs. Some work full time, while others work part time or on a contract basis. This is as it should be in a complex and dynamic economy that produces a dizzying array of over $22 trillion in goods and services annually. To overlay a 32-hour workweek on such an amalgam of business activity is like entering a room crowded with furniture and then turning off the lights. You are guaranteed to stub toes, stumble, fall and break things as you try to move around.
Under the terms of
legislation
sponsored by Congressman Mark Takano, the federal Fair Labor Standards Act would be amended to require employers to pay overtime rates for any hours worked beyond 32 hours per week. The bill’s sponsors object to the term “mandate” – no one’s being “forced” to pay overtime – but there’s little argument that the effect of a nationwide, overtime-after-32-hours policy would impose significant financial burdens on employers and create new barriers and rigidities in scheduling and working arrangements. A mandatory 32-hour workweek cuts against the worker priority for schedule flexibility and the complexity of the economy itself.
In the past, a four-day workweek has been used as a policy lever to increase the number of jobs in a sluggish economy. In 2000,
France
moved to a 35-hour week in an effort to boost a weak labor market and increase the number of available jobs. Similarly, during the Great Depression, President Franklin Roosevelt directed firms to reduce workweeks in order to reduce unemployment.[
Iceland’s more recent
experiment
in modest working-hour reductions gives us a better idea of how such a mandate might function under current conditions. About 1% of the country’s workforce had an average reduction in working hours of between one and three hours per week, considerably less than moving to a four-day week. These workers kept their pay and maintained productivity under experimental conditions where workers knew their performance might affect the future of the policy. On the other hand, in some sectors, like health care, where 24-hour, seven-day coverage is often required, Iceland’s government ended up spending an additional $33.6 million to maintain services during the shorter workweek. When government mandates a change like this, someone somewhere always picks up the tab.
The biggest challenge to imposing a 32-hour week on the U.S. economy, however, is the prevailing American labor shortage. We currently have more than 10 million open jobs with just 9 million unemployed individuals seeking work. By mandating a federal 32-hour workweek, we risk aggravating that shortage by forcing employers to expand their labor forces or pay time-and-a-half rates to existing workers to meet staffing needs. The impact of that change on overall employment levels, wages and
inflation
– already a problem – is difficult or impossible to predict. Neither workers nor do employers need more economic uncertainty at the moment.
Here’s the truth: Some American and foreign companies are already experimenting with four-day workweeks. Kickstarter and social media company Buffer are
test-driving the policy
for themselves because they believe that improvements in technology and worker productivity might mean they can maintain profitability and pay with fewer labor hours.
Microsoft Japan
and
Unilever of New Zealand
are experimenting with shorter workweeks with promising initial results. However, a recent
survey
by Gallup indicates there is a delicate trade-off between work hours, employee engagement and “thriving” that can be tricky to predict and manage. Better to leave individual businesses and workers to navigate this challenge than to impose a one-size-fits-none policy.
As with our remote work transition during the pandemic, we should be patient and allow workers and companies to negotiate their way toward conditions where a greater number of workers can enjoy the possibility of a shorter workweek without the disruption and unintended consequences that a federal mandate almost certainly would entail. If we want to honor the desire for greater job flexibility, then the shortest path to reaching that goal is to let the market work, gradually adjusting the workweek as technology and productivity improvements allow rather than using the harsh gavel of a federal law.