PAGE_TITLE: 
	Minding Our Workforce: The Importance of Noncognitive Skills in Employment | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

VIDEO
Event Materials
Event PowerPoint
Event Summary
On July 8, AEI’s Brent Orrell led a panel discussion on noncognitive skills. This served as a follow-up to AEI’s recently released edited volume “
Minding our workforce: The role of noncognitive skills in career success
.” The volume focuses on the importance of noncognitive skills in schools and in the labor market, among other areas. Today’s event featured brief presentations by Mr. Orrell and several coauthors.
Albert Cheng of the University of Arkansas, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach of Northwestern University, Harry J. Holzer of Georgetown University, and Elisabeth D. Babcock of EconomCMobility Pathways discussed their chapters and takeaways. Although they disagreed about what and how much we know about noncognitive skills, the panelists agreed that continued policymaker attention to this issue is needed and welcome.
— Anik Joshi
Event Description
In surveys, employers routinely cite noncognitive skills as the most important and hardest-to-find attributes among applicants. As the saying goes, a technical skill will get you hired, but noncognitive skills will get you fired (or determine whether you advance).
AEI’s Brent Orrell recently published a volume of essays by key researchers and practitioners considering noncognitive skills from many perspectives — such as their neurobiological basis, labor market outcomes, and approaches for teaching and training. Mr. Orrell will moderate a conversation among some of the authors — including Elisabeth D. Babcock of Economic Mobility Pathways, Albert Cheng of the University of Arkansas, Georgetown University’s Harry J. Holzer, and Northwestern University’s Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach — about their research and how they think policymakers should respond.
Agenda
1:00 PM
Introduction:
Brent Orrell
, Resident Fellow, AEI
1:30 PM
Panel discussion
Panelists:
Elisabeth D. Babcock
, President, Economic Mobility Pathways
Albert Cheng
, Assistant Professor, Department of Education Reform, University of Arkansas
Harry J. Holzer
, John LaFarge Professor of Public Policy, Georgetown University
Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
, Director, Institute for Policy Research, Northwestern University
Moderator:
Brent Orrell
, Resident Fellow, AEI
2:15 PM
Q&A
2:30 PM
Adjournment