PAGE_TITLE: 
	Serving the Poor: An Empowerment Consensus? | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Michael Tanner at the CATO Institute
just released an analysis
of a new CATO/YouGov poll that makes great companion reading for a
short AEI paper
by Mauricio Miller of the
Family Independence Initiative
that was also published today.
CATO/YouGov polled Americans about the perceived effectiveness of Great Society welfare programs in reducing poverty. The news was not unexpected: Americans of all stripes (80% of Republicans, 72% of Democrats, and 63% of welfare recipients themselves) believe the proliferation of welfare programming under President Johnson and subsequent administrations, at a cost of $26 trillion, hasn’t worked. To be fair, the public’s conclusion is a bit over-drawn. The major entitlement programs — Medicare, Medicaid, Social Security, and food stamps — combined with robust economic growth are responsible for the substantial progress the nation has made against “consumption poverty”, which has fallen from 30% in 1964 to 3% today. I doubt that these programs are what most Americans first think of when asked about “welfare.”
The point remains, however, that while the welfare apparatus has put a floor under poverty, it may also have created a ceiling, especially in conjunction with other policies like restrictive zoning, a public education monopoly, and unnecessary professional licensing regulations that limit access to social, educational, and economic opportunity.  Tanner argues these socio-economic rigidities would likely be made worse by the anti-business, soak-the-rich policies of many Democratic presidential candidates by dampening the economic growth most Americans, including the poor, believe is the most effective way to reduce poverty.
Mauricio Miller’s arguments in his new AEI report extend Tanner’s analysis down to the neighborhood and family level. Based on decades of experience as a professional anti-poverty leader in Oakland, California, Miller argues that government anti-poverty programs, which view poverty primarily through a deficit lens, retard the development of social capital and personal initiative that are the pre-requisites for “self-help.” By focusing on “need” rather than talent and capacity, current interventions tend to treat low-income individuals and families as problems to be solved rather than human beings who want to solve their own problems. Public resources flow to the most difficult cases rather than supporting the aspirations of those working to advance themselves, effectively subsidizing negative behavior while ignoring personal initiative. While acknowledging the need for a public safety net, Miller argues persuasively that we need to recognize and support “positive deviancy,” people and communities helping themselves, as the primary means of building momentum for further reductions in poverty.
We are in a new era for anti-poverty policy. A strong safety net, civil rights protections, and a growing economy have worked together to dramatically reduce material poverty. The strategies and policies that brought us to this point, however, appear to be disruptive of further progress. The work of Tanner and Miller point us toward a human-centered, asset-focused anti-poverty policy that seeks to unleash individual aspiration as the key to a more broadly shared prosperity.