PAGE_TITLE: 
	Let’s Not Write off Adam Smith Just Yet | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

You may or may not have noticed but a spirited Twitter debate has broken out between AEI’s
James Pethokoukis
and
Michael Strain
and the Manhattan Institute’s Oren Cass over Cass’s new book, “
The Once and Future Worker
.” To provide a too brief and therefore incomplete and unfair summary of the Cass thesis, the US focus on economic growth, as measured by increases in gross domestic product, has been a big disappointment. Despite a near tripling of GDP since 1970, middle and lower-skilled workers have seen little or no progress, with most of the gains accruing to the top of the income distribution. Cass identifies a number of contributing factors to what he calls “Economic Piety”: free trade, high levels of immigration, and environmental policies that constrain energy consumption, industrial modernization, and output.
In his new book, Oren Cass criticizes what he calls the “economic piety” approach to economic policy pursued by the last several administrations. Image via REUTERS/Larry Downing
Cass suggests a new paradigm he calls “productive pluralism” that de-emphasizes GDP for GDP’s sake and focuses on strengthening the human capital base. He proposes a series of policy changes that would increase the value of labor inputs through improved training programs (chiefly employer-sponsored job training programs) and increase the value of labor itself by shifting the rules on trade, immigration, and environmental policy to favor the creation of meaningful, family- and community-sustaining work here at home.
On his main point critiquing the GDP measure, I demur. We had a 16-year experiment in sub-par growth combined with increased investment in human capital called the Bush and Obama administrations. What that experiment brought us is the populist uprising that culminated in the election of Donald Trump. An America angry over 2 percent growth is unlikely to find happiness with 1 or 1.5 percent growth. Innovation, productivity, cheap imports, and transfer programs have basically eliminated consumption poverty in the US. As Joan Rivers used to say, “Money can’t buy happiness. But it sure makes unhappiness a lot more fun.”
To say that Cass takes a dim view of consumption is to put things lightly — very lightly. Cass grounds his argument in a quote from Adam Smith which essentially says consumption is all that matters. The concerns of producers (including workers) matter only to the degree that they affect consumers. This is a very dim view of producers, indeed. It’s also, however, at least a misreading of what Adam Smith actually believed.
In truth, Smith was quite skeptical of consumption as a path to happiness. His writing makes wry observations about conspicuous consumption among the wealthy of his day. He would probably be bemused by contemporary commercialism and the fixation on things like consumer electronics even while being fascinated by their evolution. He knew neither money nor consumption added a great deal to personal happiness, which he understood chiefly as a condition of mental tranquility. The “
Theory of Moral Sentiments
,” a work he wrote and revised over the full course of his adult life, reads as an extended treatise on human sympathy as the source of tranquility and the foundation for economic life. A beggar, he said, sunning himself by the side of a road “possesses the security kings are fighting for.” There’s truth in that, even if most of us would choose kingship over beggary any day of the week and two times on Sunday.
And it is on this point — the source of tranquility — that Cass is onto something very important. The focus on economic growth for its own sake is, in a way, a form of the materialist illusion: all that matters is what I can see and enjoy here and now — albeit one that has the benefit of reducing poverty and otherwise knocking the rough edges off the human condition. The benefits of innovation, growth, and trade are obvious — as anyone reading this article through a high-speed internet connection, awaiting anesthesia before surgery, or enjoying ample clean water and healthy food will be happy to tell you.
But growth and the material well-being it creates are not sufficient to achieve Smith’s tranquility. At times, a life of wealth is at war with this kind of happiness. Ease of mind, security, and well-being is the integration of enough material goods for comfort combined with the social wealth and warmth that comes to us from family, friends, and community. Moreover, it is these forms of social wealth that create the most productive and innovative societies. Aim for strong families and communities, and you may get both social and material wealth. Aim only for material wealth and you may end up with neither. Cass’s policy prescriptions for fostering human well-being are up for debate but he has helped to locate its true source and opened up a discussion on how to get more of it.