PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Meaning of Work During COVID-19 | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

The Sunday
New York Times
profiled the home health aides
of New York City who continue to make rounds assisting elderly and disabled individuals in the midst of COVID-19 got me thinking about the issue of vocation and calling.
Americans are notoriously pragmatic when it comes to work —
or at least we pretend to be. We work to make money. If we’re also happy with
our jobs, well, that’s nice but not essential. Parents obsess over making sure
their children use their education to acquire narrowly-defined “skills” that
will ensure employment while neglecting broader questions relating to their
child’s abilities and interests. The main question on our minds is not, “Who
are you?” but “What are you going to do with that?”
Workers sell goods behind a makeshift plastic barricade during the outbreak of Coronavirus disease (COVID-19), in the Manhattan borough of New York City, New York, U.S., March 25, 2020. REUTERS/Carlo Allegri
I think the truth is that, mainly, we gravitate toward tasks
that engage our interests and skills and provide a sense of meaning and
purpose. Chasing money alone often leaves people drained and bitter. An
attorney friend said to me once, “Law school is a pie-eating contest. And if
you win, you get more pie,” which is not exactly a ringing endorsement of a
legal career regardless of compensation. Pursuing vocation — a sense of calling
to exercise our innate gifts and abilities — gives a sense of satisfaction no
amount of money can normally provide.
The individuals interviewed in the Times — most of whom were
minority women working at minimum wage and often dependent on other subsidies,
like nutritional assistance, to make ends meet —demonstrate a strong sense of
vocation. In the meals, personal care, and therapy they provide to society’s
most vulnerable and most easily forgotten and neglected individuals, they often
find a profound sense of personal satisfaction. As one worker put it:
“‘In my line of work, you have to do everything possible to give them care,’ she said. ‘It’s in the contract. It’s the work I chose because I love to help people. My care for people is beyond. When they have a blizzard, I go.’”
With the service and retail sectors largely locked down due
to COVID, these personal aides are commuting around New York City by subway (a significant
COVID risk vector in itself) caring for people with little or no other
connection to the outside world — and apparently enjoying it. During debate on
the recently-passed COVID rescue package, a number of our elected
representatives resisted the expansion of unemployment insurance on the grounds
that it might encourage low-wage workers to sit at home rather than get a job. This
fear grows out of the misunderstanding I discussed above: People need to work
for money, but they
want
to work for
the psychological income employment provides.
Human nature being what it is, there will doubtless be those who malinger and abuse unemployment and other public benefits for private gain during this crisis. Low-wage workers are not alone in this weakness: witness
this article
on how corporate America is lining up for some of the COVID cash. I suspect these abuses will be small relative to the countless millions who behave dutifully in the face of grave danger making large sacrifices to ensure our health, safety, and well-being — not because they have to but because they want to.