PAGE_TITLE: 
	Identity and Agency: A New Approach to Rehabilitation and Reentry | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Editor’s Note: This is a chapter from the edited volume
“Rethinking Reentry” by Brent Orrell
.
Introduction
Since the early 2000s, I have been using a story to kick off discussions relating to criminal justice and reentry. The story involves a man drowning in a lake. He is 50 yards off shore, flailing and gasping for breath.
A progressive comes upon this scene, throws 1,000 yards of rope, smiles beneficently, and departs. Later, a conservative arrives, sees the drowning man, and throws 25 yards of rope while exhorting the drowning man to swim. A libertarian strolls by, sees the drowning man, and acknowledges that he does, indeed, have a rope of the correct length. However, it is a rope he earned through his own hard work and diligence. It would be bad for everyone—himself, the drowning man, and society—if he shared his rope. Did the drowning man have anything he could perhaps trade for a rope?
Throughout these visitations, a neoconservative has been
observing thoughtfully from the beach. He pulls out his laptop and writes 800
well-chosen words detailing progressive waste, conservative folly, and
libertarian heartlessness. Meanwhile, the man in the lake is still flailing and
gasping.
I love that story, which I inherited from Tevi Troy, my
predecessor as the leader of the Center for Faith-Based and Community
Initiatives at the US Department of Labor. (In my better moments, I think about
writing him a check. He has saved me an enormous amount of time looking for
good illustrations.) The story is an equal opportunity offender that singes
without burning because it points out that each ideological perspective lacks a
workable solution to the problems of crime, imprisonment, and recidivism. Much
has been tried, yet little has been effective.
The US incarcerates over two million people and has another
4.7 mil­lion on probation and parole.
1
Up to 70 million Americans have criminal records, and as many Americans have arrest records as have bachelor’s degrees.
2
The Brennan Center for Justice estimates that if all Americans with criminal records held hands, they could circle the earth three times.
3
Studies show that about two-thirds of those released from prison for a fel­ony offense will find themselves behind bars again within three years. Most will return to prison in the first few months after release.
4
This is expensive in every possible way—fiscally, economically, and socially. A 2016 study by the Washington University in St. Louis found that the direct costs of incarceration—about $80 billion per year or nearly $40,000 per year per inmate—are dwarfed by the human and economic costs. When you add lost productivity and the social costs inflicted on families, communities, and the next generation by mass incarceration, researchers estimate Americans lose about $1 trillion per year, or 6 percent of the nation’s gross domestic product, due to incarceration.
5
That is almost as much as the federal government collects in income taxes.
6
It is more than we pay out in Social Security benefits
7
and equal to what Congress appropriates for all the federal government’s defense and nondefense discretionary programs.
8
This figure does not include the additional hundreds of billions spent on policing or the untold costs vic­tims incurred. To paraphrase the late Senate minority leader Everett Dirk­sen, a trillion dollars is real money, even by today’s standards. We spend or forgo it year after year after year.
Given the number of people affected and the costs, foundations, nonprofits, and federal, state, and local governments have spent billions experimenting with different ways of preventing men and women who have served their time from serving even more time. We are also spending significant money evaluating these programs’ effects. To date, the results of these investments have not been encouraging.
In 2018, with the support of Arnold Ventures, the American
Enter­prise Institute (AEI) assembled a working group of some of the nation’s
leading researchers, evaluators, and service providers to consider a wide range
of issues relating to criminal justice and reentry. Each expert has his or her
own perspective and concerns that are reflected in his or her contribution to
this volume. The main question I was interested in exploring through the
working group was: Looking just at the data, what works best?
The evidence-based answer was discouraging. Despite best efforts by leaders in the public and private sector, the weight of available evidence from evaluations of large-scale, comprehensive programs is that control groups—the individuals who do not receive the intervention being studied—do about as well and in some cases better than those who receive service. Some program components may be effective, but attempts at putting it all together have been left wanting.
This is not a new concern. In the 1970s, avowed socialist and City College of New York sociology professor Robert Martinson was the first to conclude that prisoner rehabilitation programs were ineffective.
9
This prompted a furious response and Martinson’s partial retraction.
10
Nonetheless, the phenomenon of disappointing results in these programs remains with us. A summation of existing program evidence is available in Chapter 1 of this volume (Lattimore). The relative absence of program approaches that make significant dents in recidivism remains a crucial concern in reentry policy and practice.
There is, however, another way of looking at the “nothing works” chal­lenge. What if we reimagined our existing randomized control trial studies with the control group—those who are not getting services—as the ones being “treated”? As I already noted, these individuals, who are largely mak­ing their own way using community resources, often do as well or better than those taking part in structured reentry programs.
11
To me, this sug­gests that the libertarian in our drowning man joke might have more to offer than the story suggests.
By taking a step back, might we create a space in which individual agency and initiative can operate more effectively? Would such an approach increase the sense of ownership for outcomes among our “drowning” men and women? Would it help leverage the most important assets in the reentry equation, the will and energy of the returnees themselves?
This chapter is devoted to outlining a new approach that focuses on developing and resourcing personal agency as the key to successful reen­try. It proposes combining features of our existing reentry processes that have demonstrated some capacity for supporting individual, pro-social change as part of an approach that tests for and helps build momentum for identity change as the key to a successful transition.
Read the full chapter.
Notes
1. Daniell Kaeble and Mary Cowhig, “Correctional Populations in the United States, 2016,” US Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Office of Justice Programs, April 2018,
https://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/cpus16.pdf
.
2. Jo Craven McGinty, “How Many Americans Have a Police Record? Probably More Than You Think,”
Wall Street Journal
, August 7, 2015,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/how-many-americans-have-a-police-record-probably-more-than-you-think-1438939802
.
3. Matthew Friedman, “Just Facts: As Many Americans Have Criminal Records as College Diplomas,” Brennan Center for Justice, November 17, 2015,
https://www.brennancenter.org/blog/just-facts-many-americans-have-criminal-records-college-diplomas
.
4. Mariel Alper et al., “2018 Update on Prisoner Recidivism: A 9-Year Follow-Up Period (2005–2014),” US Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Office of Justice Programs, May 2018,
https://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/18upr9yfup0514.pdf
; and National Institute of Justice, “Measuring Recidivism,” February 20, 2008,
https://nij.ojp.gov/topics/articles/measuring-recidivism
.
5. Michael McLaughlin et al., “The Economic Burden of Incarceration in the U.S.,” Concordance Institute for Advancing Social Justice, George Warren Brown School of Social Work, July 2016,
https://joinnia.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/The-Economic-Burden-of-Incarceration-in-the-US-2016.pdf
.
6. Tax Policy Center, “Briefing Book,” 2018,
https://www.taxpolicycenter.org/briefing-book/what-are-sources-revenue-federal-government
.
7. Steven T. Mnuchin et al., “The 2019 Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Federal Disability Insurance Trust Funds,” Social Security Administration, 2019,
https://www.ssa.gov/oact/TR/2019/tr2019.pdf
.
8. Congressional Budget Office, “Discretionary Spending in 2018: An Infographic,” June 2018,
https://www.cbo.gov/publication/55344
.
9. Robert Martinson, “What Works?—Questions and Answers About Prison Reform,”
Public Interest
, 1974,
https://www.gwern.net/docs/sociology/1974-martinson.pdf
.
10. Robert Martinson, “New Findings, New Views: A Note of Caution Regarding Sentencing Reform,”
Hofstra Law Review
7, no. 2 (1979): 243–58,
https://pdfs.semantic­scholar.org/dad6/c69d7e7fed8fc4f04ddfd5e7869230ae62fe.pdf
.
11. For several examples, see Pamela K. Lattimore,
“Considering Reentry Program Evaluation: Thoughts from SVORI (and Other)
Evaluations,” in
Rethinking Reentry
,
ed. Brent Orrell (Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute, 2019).