PAGE_TITLE: 
	Why the BA Still Matters | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

I need to take a moment to register partial disagreement with my colleague,
Naomi Schaefer Riley
, and her co-author, James Piereson, in relation to
this piece
in National Review. The article is another installment of the “college doesn’t matter” meme among conservatives who, rightly, hold the competition for slots in elite colleges in high suspicion. I say “rightly” because I agree it is pretty close to insane how much stock the middle and upper classes put on getting a four-year degree from a “good” (read: expensive and exclusive) college or university. Given the over-supply of well-qualified PhD’s seeking to become professors, you can pretty much count on high quality, if relatively unknown, subject matter experts at whichever school you attend. From a labor market standpoint, what matters is: a) finishing (the market signaling function the article points out); and, b) acquiring a broad set of skills that include a balance of analytical, technological, and non-cognitive (soft) skills.
Where I demur from Schaefer Riley and Piereson is the idea that undergraduate education, per se, is a bad investment. In his recent book,
Robot-Proof: Higher Education in the Age of Artificial Intelligence
, Northeastern University president, Joseph Aoun, makes the point that education, beginning with the grammar school movement through universal high school and the modern G.I. Bill, has been the linchpin of a modernizing, growing economy and rising living standards. Each transition (from agricultural to manufacturing to information) Aoun says has been marked by a need for more schooling, not less. The same will almost certainly be true as we enter the age of artificial intelligence and machine learning. To have hope for reversing stalled-out economic mobility, we need to restore what Harvard economists Claudia Golden and Lawrence Katz describe as a
virtuous partnership
between educational attainment and economic performance that has characterized our economic history.
Schaefer Riley and Piereson are right that no amount of formal education can make up for the non-cognitive or soft-skills deficits that plague the workforce. Such skills are the
sine qua non
of academic and professional success. But for those who start with good foundations, formal education — and especially, perhaps, the much-maligned bachelor’s degree — matters a great deal to initial earnings and long-term professional advancement in an economy that increasingly rewards those who can think critically, creatively, systemically and flexibly. When it comes to the future workforce, which will require more knowledge and skills rather than less, ignorance is not bliss but a ticket to stagnating wages.
Of course, the real test of what we actually believe about this issue is what we encourage our own children to do. I’m continuing to tell my own kids to start and finish degrees and to be prepared for a professional life marked by frequent job changes and continuous learning. There are multiple paths to a successful and satisfying work life, including career and technical education. But the bachelor’s degree, as expensive and imperfect as it is, remains a critical foundation for building a workforce that can lead and manage a skill-hungry, technology-driven economic future marked by ever more rapid change.