PAGE_TITLE: 
	Hard and Soft Skills in High-tech Training | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

A recent New York Times
article
highlights the remarkable outcomes of
Pursuit
, a tech workforce training nonprofit working with low-income individuals in New York City. 85 percent of the program’s 300 graduates ended up in a tech job within a year, and the average annual income for these individuals is around $85,000. This represents a more than 350 percent increase in earnings for program participants (up from an average of $18,000), nearly half of whom were on public assistance at the time of admission.
So what’s the magic? The article highlights three practices that seem to be associated with program success: an emphasis on personal motivation, development of a holistic set of noncognitive and technical skills that prepare participants for lasting success, and long-term commitment to program participants.
Pursuit provides their services to individuals who have the “highest need,” but they only accept a small percentage of the people that apply to the program, looking for attributes like problem-solving and perseverance to indicate training readiness. This preference for highly motivated candidates aligns well with
research
by Angela Duckworth on the concept of “grit,” which suggests that factors like
passion and perseverance
are stronger indicators of future success than IQ or many other traditional “crystal ball” metrics.
Pursuit places a priority on mastering both computer programming and a range of interpersonal skills like teamwork and effective communication. This combination of hard- and soft-skill training has a proven
track record
and directly correlates to what employers
say they look for
in new employees. Pursuit’s approach is echoed in evaluations of similar programs, such as those studied in the
MDRC Work Advance
project, which also noted the importance of combined hard- and soft-skill training.
Finally, even though Pursuit’s training program can be completed in 10 months, the nonprofit pitches its program as a four-year commitment that includes three years of mentoring after training completion. This underscores the importance of social connections and
mentoring
in helping help individuals navigate the challenges and opportunities of life in the workforce.
Pursuit is part of a growing sector of what
Ryan Craig
describes as “last-mile” training providers. These entities are close to employers and workers, and they specialize in tailored training models that meet market demand by solving skill deficits for otherwise talented and motivated workers. For Americans seeking good, middle-skill jobs, these groups provide an essential bridge to a more promising future.