PAGE_TITLE: 
	Life After Roe: Supporting Women and Families Facing Unexpected Pregnancies | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Key Points
In the post–
Roe v. Wade
world, state governments will revise laws and regulations about abortion access. All states, whether their elected officials favor abortion access or decide to restrict access to the procedure, should review laws and programs affecting women facing unexpected pregnancy.
For many women, unexpected pregnancy is accompanied by financial hardship, health issues, substance use disorders, housing needs, and other challenges. To help these women, states should review benefit and service strategies to help ensure women have the support they need for healthy pregnancies and babies, whether they live in states that allow abortion or ones that seek to restrict it.
The federal government can help by implementing a balanced, pro-family tax credit; increasing appropriations for existing maternal and child health safety-net programs; and creating a new maternity choice voucher program to provide immediate, supplemental support to women facing unexpected pregnancies.
Read the PDF.
Introduction
On June 24, 2022, the US Supreme Court decision in
Dobbs
v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization
held that the United States Constitution
does not protect abortion as a constitutional right, overturning previous Court
opinions in
Roe v. Wade
and
Planned Parenthood v. Casey
. The
Dobbs
ruling closes the era in which abortion policy was set at the national
level and begins a new era in which abortion policy will be determined by state
legislatures and governors. It also means federal and state governments will
have more to do than just regulate the abortion procedure. Especially in states
that are likely to restrict abortion, governments will need to begin a thorough
review of supports and benefits extended to women who can no longer terminate a
pregnancy.
Federalized abortion policy has been at the heart of social
policy debate for decades. The polarized political age we live in was created
and shaped in no small part by the
Roe
decision itself. As Chief Justice
John Roberts said in his
Dobbs
concurrence, this “is a serious jolt to
the legal system”—and not just the legal system but our politics and the
administrative state as well.
1
Elected officials—local, county, state, and
federal—who have had the ability to defer to the Court for 50 years on abortion
policy now face a reckoning: They must determine how to fashion abortion policies
that reflect public attitudes and plan to support low-income pregnant women and
their infants in jurisdictions where access to abortion is limited or
nonexistent.
This will be difficult and contentious work—the kind elected
officials, grown used to symbolic politics channeled through social media, are
badly out of practice in performing. Abandoning women experiencing unexpected
or undesired pregnancies to a world in which they can neither get an abortion
nor find adequate social and financial supports for pregnancy and childbearing
seems both contradictory and callous, a betrayal of a genuine pro-life stance.
For the pro-life movement, the long-sought demise of
Roe
marks a starting
rather than ending point.
Dobbs
creates new challenges—but it also contains new
opportunities for advancing how we support women facing unexpected pregnancies.
With the constitutional issue now decided, people of goodwill—pro-life and
pro-choice—who share a commitment to the value and dignity of the human person
may be able to work together to fashion compromises that affirm the intrinsic
value of women
and
the children they bring into the world.
Tough debates lie ahead. If we remain polarized between an
unrestricted abortion policy and a sometimes punitive pro-life stance that
insists on pregnancy and skimps on financial and social resources, we will
demonstrate only that neither side was ever sincere in its arguments about
either human dignity or what a compassionate response to dignity entails. Life
after
Roe
will require open hearts and open checkbooks, public and
private, to prove otherwise.
This report outlines a few key policies that can provide a
foundation for state and federal policymakers to use to build a welcoming and
affirming culture for mothers facing unplanned pregnancies and the children
they bring into this world. The report first examines the current landscape of
unexpected pregnancy and abortion and then moves to a set of policy recommendations
that could be used to strengthen the financial and social safety net supporting
pregnant women and families. These proposals are far from exhaustive. In fact,
they may only scratch the surface of the compassion and creativity the moment
demands as we step into the post-
Roe
era. But they are a start.
Read the full report.
Notes
Nina Totenberg and Sarah McCammon, “Supreme Court Overturns Roe v. Wade, Ending Right to Abortion Upheld for Decades,” National Public Radio, June 24, 2022,
https://www.npr.org/2022/06/24/1102305878/supreme-court-abortion-roe-v-wade-decision-overturn
.