PAGE_TITLE: 
	Why Students Should Forget the Coronavirus Gap Year to Take an Essential Job Instead | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Growing up in Oregon, I worked on a potato farm moving 30-pound, 20-foot aluminum sections of irrigation pipe across what seemed like an ocean of plants producing what eventually became bags of potato chips.
It was hot, dirty, back-breaking work that often ran to 10 or more hours a day. I still struggle with a farm-related back injury I got at 16 and have to monitor fair skin for sun damage and cancer. Many people romanticize farm life; I do not. Mostly, I feel lucky that after that job, I never had to work outdoors again for a living.
However, those years did teach me to appreciate the people who do essential jobs in our economy. It is impossible for me to look at the men and women who pave our roads, pick our produce, build our houses, and extract our coal and oil from the ground without feeling a sense of gratitude in part because of memories of hard, physical labor.
This came to mind in reflecting on the challenges that our high school and college students and graduates face as they consider their options in the worst job market since the 1930s. As it could take a while for colleges to resume normal operation and the job market to recover, young people should take time to consider other options. Instead of a “gap year” where learning takes the form of travel, students ought to consider an “essential job year” spent taking on a different kind of work than what they might have considered before.
In normal times,
college graduates usually gravitate toward cities and suburbs
where they can find jobs that help them leverage their degrees into higher wages. This
has led to the “big sort”
where those with higher incomes and levels of education find themselves in less and less contact with those who do “essential” jobs. Manual labor used to be much more common and helped to create a shared social understanding for work. In 1900, factories and farms employed 60 percent of the workforce; today that
figure is less than 10 percent.
An “essential job year” would allow people in
Belmont to gain a better understanding of life and work in Fishtown
.
In addition to building empathy and connection, recent research suggests that diverse experiences are good for career exploration and skill building. In his recent book,
“Range: Why Generalists Triumph in a Specialized World,”
David Epstein looks at how rapid technological change and a highly integrated global economy has increased the value of diverse experiences and broad skill sets over narrower ones. An “essential job” can teach young people skills in relating to people different than themselves and expose them to career pathways they might not otherwise encounter. As in my case, an “essential” job can also help people understand what they don’t want out of a career and adjust education and training accordingly.
As bad as the job market currently is, it isn’t completely without opportunities. Walmart, Amazon, Ace Hardware and
more have hired hundreds of thousands
and are continuing to do so. A variety of
retail outlets including grocery stores, online shopping services, delivery companies and pharmacies
are also hiring. These are some of the “essential” jobs of the moment, and people to fill them are badly needed.
Year of service is good option
High school and college graduates may also want to consider community service opportunities during their “essential job year.” Fordham University Professor Leonard Cassuto
has argued that the pandemic presents a unique chance for students
to make a real difference in their communities. Cassuto says that in light of the pandemic, all Americans, including students, are more aware of our responsibility to our communities.
A year spent in community service can help narrow social divides and promote civic engagement.
Habitat for Humanity has a gap program
this year as does
Service Year
, which is promoting opportunities in the nation’s response to COVID-19 and in disaster relief and health care. In addition, some states and localities are hiring for short-term jobs to assist with
COVID-19 testing
and contact tracing.
Rethink expectations to move forward
The trick for young people is to slough off the disappointment of dashed hopes and expectations and rethink how to put this time to use.
Here’s the bottom line: for decades we have thought about education and employment mainly in terms of our own interests and desire for self-fulfillment. The wrenching changes wrought by COVID-19 and the delays the disease is imposing on all our lives don’t have to be thought of as a waste.
Work — paid or volunteer — creates an outlet for energy and an opportunity for our graduates to learn about themselves and others while providing essential services to their communities. This crisis gives young people a chance to learn not from success but from service. We should encourage them to take it.