PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Art of Science | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

My AEI colleague Tony Mills recently published a
paper
about the role of judgement in science-based policymaking. He makes the important point that scientific exploration, as well as the application of findings, is neither a simple equation nor an automatic, self-guiding process. Instead, it depends on human judgment at every stage. While we tend to think of scientific education and training as a matter of equipping individuals with a discreet set of skills and tools, the practice of actual science is an interplay between a scientist’s interests and insights — the questions they want to ask — and the scientific method of data collection and analysis.
Before arriving at an experiment, a scientist must determine what is studied (curiosity), how it is to be observed and under what conditions, and how to interpret the results. Each step of this process involves critical thought, judgement, and choice. Even the act of observation, depending on the topic and methods, can influence what is being observed and therefore the outcomes of the study. Similarly, the hypothesis that is tested is influenced by other auxiliary hypotheses and unstated assumptions. Such factors point toward an idea of science that, in reality, has much
in common with art
.
Via Twenty20
As Mills’ paper
points out, the role of judgment in science reaches its apex in the application
of findings. Just as the scientific process is not automated, so the use of
scientific findings demands interpretation and contextualization as well as
political trade-offs that help account for the limits of what people in a
democratic society will tolerate. As we have seen with the COVID-19 pandemic,
people are all too willing to ignore scientific findings if they are
unconvinced that the desired policy outcomes are worth the costs being imposed.
The development of the kind of deliberative and judgment skills Mills’ paper talks about is not an abstract question or limited just to those who work in science-related sectors. Across the workforce, employers continue to tell us that the nation’s real “skills gap” lies less in areas of narrow technical skills and
more in noncognitive categories
like critical thinking, teamwork, and communication. Building up the supply of these skills among workers is an urgent priority in an economy that increasingly rewards those who possess them and limits those who do not.
Producing more and better judgment in students and workers is not an easy task. In fact, it runs up against larger social trends like declining family formation, problems in our educational systems, and the atrophy of our civil society, which are the chief mechanisms that shape and prepare us for all aspects of life. Mills is helping us see how much we rely on these diffuse and intangible human characteristics and their importance to building systems, policies, and institutions that work.