PAGE_TITLE: 
	White Rural Rage? Not So Fast | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

In
White Rural Rage
, political scientist Tom Schaller and journalist Paul Waldman examine the perceived anger and political leanings of white rural Americans. The authors argue that this demographic poses a unique threat to American democracy, attributing to them characteristics such as racism, homophobia, xenophobia, and a predisposition to violence and authoritarianism.
Critics have
argued
that the book’s methodology and data interpretation are flawed, some going as far as to accuse the authors of academic malpractice and distorting data to fit a preconceived narrative. Even the definition of “rural” used in the book is contested.
Nicholas F. Jacobs, a political scientist at Colby College and author of
The Rural Voter: The Politics of Place and the Disuniting of America
,
contends
that the Schaller and Waldman take a reductionist view of rural America that fails to capture the nuances of rural Americans’ attitudes, hopes, and fears. He asks, reasonably, how could less than 20 percent of America, isolated from the economic, cultural, and political power centers of the country, present an existential threat to the majority who do not live in rural areas?
The answer, of course, is that they cannot. The real threats to democracy emanate from the people and places that feed off our nation’s challenges and inject falsehoods and conspiracy theories into the political bloodstream. We need to think more deeply and carefully about the real underlying sources of our social, economic, and political challenges instead of resorting to scapegoating unpopular minorities.
To help achieve this deeper understanding, I’ve partnered with Brookings scholar Tony Pipa to create “On the Front Porch,” a series of conversations with researchers and other experts who look at the challenges facing rural America. Thus far, our conversations have included
Nick Jacobs
,
Elizabeth Currid-Halkett
,
Kathy Edin and Tim Nelson
, and
Carol Graham
. These wide-ranging discussions have shed light on the unique challenges and opportunities rural regions face. As importantly, they’ve helped reveal that despite their problems, these regions have shown remarkable resilience and “green shoots” of hope and recovery that deserve our attention and support.
Ultimately, understanding rural America requires surrendering stereotypes and engaging with the real and diverse experiences of its people. This can give us a more accurate picture of life beyond our cities and help to mend our divides.