PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Slow, Self-inflicted Demise of the Liberal Arts | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Inside Higher Education
reported yesterday that the ax is swinging at the nation’s liberal arts programs. The poll of university provosts found that 78 percent of chief academic officers believe universities are prioritizing technical and professional education over traditional liberal arts programs, and that 90 percent believe these programs are essential to a high quality education.
@cric_ab via Twenty20
The poll is just the latest evidence of a sad but not surprising trend. The forces pushing against the liberal arts are immense. Science and professional programs have cultural prestige and, not coincidentally, are the most obvious pathway for students to achieve a life in the upper-middle class. In the same vein, parents worry that without practical skills, their children will have little chance of remaining in or joining the middle class. Last month, I hired a student from a well-regarded liberal arts college to help with some chores. He told me he was a double-major in computer science and philosophy, with a strong preference for philosophy and a passion for Aristotle. His parents made him learn computers. That’s social aspiration voting on the hoof.
At one level, this is not in the least bit surprising largely because of the way liberal arts programs have been co-opted by the post-modernist Grievance Industrial Complex. There’s a reason students and parents believe these programs don’t work because, often, they don’t. They tend to leave graduates with a pile of debt, a distorted picture of society and social relationships, and no obvious pathway to a career. With a few
notable exceptions
, liberal arts programs look more like a cultural food-fight than an integrated body of learning that shapes our ability to think and prepares us for life in a diverse, democratic society.
This is a tragedy for our students, economy, and culture. The kinds of skills one gains in traditional liberal arts — analytical capacity, empathy for the human condition, inter-personal engagement — are precisely those skills that businesses say are most lacking in the workforce. (And judging by last weekend’s events at the Lincoln Memorial, there’s a social deficit that mirrors the workforce problem.) Combining STEM and liberal arts, like my furniture mover, is probably one of the best bets from an economic standpoint. For American culture, the alarming thing is not that liberal arts programs are being shuttered. Many of them are eminently shutter-able. But the ebbing of these programs is part of a broader loss of confidence in the values, beliefs, knowledge, practices, and intellectual habits that my colleague Jonah Goldberg calls
“the Miracle”
of western society in the first place. In the end, we can’t sever the root and expect the tree to bear fruit.