PAGE_TITLE: 
	Biden’s Manufacturing Order Misses the Point | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

On Monday, President Biden signed an executive order
aimed at strengthening domestic manufacturing by imposing stricter rules on
government procurement practices. It seems clear that this order is unlikely to
have much impact on actual manufacturing employment in the short term and is
more likely a signal-sending exercise for other policies to come.
Biden’s new executive order focuses on closing federal
contracting loopholes that allowed companies to ship production overseas while
still claiming the products were made in the US. It also seeks to improve
access to federal contracts for small and midsized businesses. Of greatest
importance, the order creates a new position within the Office of Management
and Budget to ensure implementation of the new requirements. The long-term goal
of the Biden administration is to use taxpayer dollars to invest more in
domestic products in order to build up American supply chains and expand the
middle class with higher-paying jobs.
President Joe Biden speaks on American manufacturing before signing an executive order related to American manufacturing and American workers, at the Eisenhower Executive Office Building in Washington, DC on Monday, January 25, 2021. Via REUTERS/Kevin Dietsch/Pool/Sipa USA
The new order is very similar to one issued by President Trump which also called for a significant increase in the percentage of domestic content required for the product to be considered American-made as part of federal procurements. President Biden backs an increase in the threshold for local contents and the prices of domestic goods. The Trump order was relatively easy for companies to avoid, a problem likely to plague the Biden approach as well. It’s a comparatively “weak” lever for trying to boost manufacturing employment — which, by the way, has been
fairly robust
even during the COVID-related recession.
The larger problem is the orders and other measures that try to force reliance on domestic manufacturing don’t really address what ails the American workforce: chiefly, a failure to equip new workers with relevant, in-demand skills and provide upskilling opportunities for our incumbent workers. Current employment challenges need to be thought of in terms of human capital development, and we need to ask why a gap persists between what our economy needs and what our educational institutions are producing. Protective, America-first measures just don’t address these persistent, chronic workforce development challenges, and they divert attention from our underlying problems.