PAGE_TITLE: 
	No One Can Make Us Care - but We Should | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

We’re settling in for the long haul of the COVID-19 pandemic, and, unfortunately, some of the early, crisis-driven solidarity is beginning to wear thin. Several months ago,
I wrote about home health care workers
who had braved New York subways to care for their clients and how they deserved respect as much as they do applause for putting themselves in harm’s way to serve those in even greater need. Alas, we are apparently lapsing into our old, entitled ways.
Staff members at the end of their shift leave the Life Care Center of Kirkland, the Seattle-area nursing home at the epicenter of one of the biggest coronavirus outbreaks in the United States, in Kirkland, Washington, U.S., March 16, 2020.   REUTERS/Brian Snyder
Last week, The New York Times last week had a
richly reported feature
about how housekeepers had been hit especially hard by the pandemic. The main effects have been two-fold: a sudden collapse in demand due to social isolation requirements and a problem of “ghosting” as workers were dropped suddenly and without notice by their employers. Since many of these workers lack legal immigration status, they are also ineligible for unemployment insurance, thus leaving them with virtually no means of sustaining themselves or their dependents. People who functioned effectively as a part of the families they served were suddenly completely on their own with no means of support.
To put a cherry
on the top of this story, the Times article recounted how two married
professors at the University of Pennsylvania asked a housekeeper they had used
only sporadically since the pandemic to come for a special cleaning of their
house. When she arrived, the housekeeper noticed the house was empty and that
the owners had left several bottles of disinfectant. As she was finishing, an
alarmed neighbor informed her that the entire family had come down with COVID. This
family had exposed their housekeeper to significant health risk without
informing her. The people who were employing her didn’t care enough about her
life to share something with her that could have potentially ended it.
At the outset of the pandemic, I
wrote about
the need to pay special attention to low-income populations — both because they often lack access to important information about the disease and because they are disproportionately affected by underlying conditions that increase morbidity and mortality. It’s been disappointing to see just how indifferent, and sometimes hostile, American society has been toward the needs and suffering of those most at-risk from this illness. The
elderly in care homes, migrant farm workers, men and women behind bars
,
people working in meat processing plants
, and
Native Americans
are suffering and dying disproportionately and, for the most part, invisibly while many in the middle and upper classes complain about virus-imposed inconveniences. Life is not fair, but this not-so-benign neglect and selfishness goes beyond unfairness and borders on injustice.
Fundamentally, the callousness we are exhibiting toward those at greatest risk is a fracture in the social compact. We can say “thanks for your service” to grocery clerks and stand and applaud as hospital workers change shifts as much as we want. But until we honor “essential workers” by changing our own behavior — observing social distance, wearing masks, avoiding activities like going to bars, protests, and rallies that hold the potential to spread the virus rapidly — it’s mostly just empty talk.