PAGE_TITLE: 
	Criminal Justice Reform in 2018: A Conversation with Rep. Hakeem Jeffries (D-NY) and Rep. Doug Collins (R-GA) | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Event Summary
AEI’s Brent Orrell hosted Reps. Hakeem Jeffries (D-NY) and Doug Collins (R-GA) on Thursday morning for a conversation about their new bill, the FIRST STEP Act. Among other things, the bill would expand opportunities for rehabilitation and vocational training in federal prisons and increase the use of risk assessment tools.
In their opening remarks, Reps. Jeffries and Collins discussed the importance of finding common ground in the midst of a polarized Congress, and Rep. Jeffries noted that criminal justice reform has become a bipartisan issue where some forward movement is possible. While both members conceded that the new bill does not address every issue they would like to see resolved, it captures what Rep. Collins dubbed “the art of the possible.”
The Q&A centered on how the two members found areas of agreement and on the nature of the bill itself. The bill, both men noted, intentionally does not address sentencing reform. This is because sentencing reform tends to be much more contentious in Congress, with many members feeling that it gives people a free pass for bad behavior. They noted, however, that doing nothing would be a disservice to incarcerated individuals and their families, who deserve change.
— Caleb Seibert
Event Description
More than 650,000 people are released from federal and state prison every year, and more than 75 percent of them will be behind bars again within five years. With such high rates of recidivism, what evidence-based models and programs are available to improve the odds of success for released prisoners?
Please join AEI for a conversation with FIRST STEP Act cosponsors, Rep. Hakeem Jeffries (D-NY) and Rep. Doug Collins (R-GA), for a discussion on how policymakers can help the formerly incarcerated successfully reintegrate into work and society.
Join the conversation on social media with @AEI on
Twitter
and
Facebook
.
If you are unable to attend, we welcome you to watch the event live on this page. Full video will be posted within 24 hours.
VIDEO