PAGE_TITLE: 
	A Better Path Forward for the Workforce: Considerations for Congress in Stimulus Negotiations | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

It’s been a month since the $600 per week unemployment insurance payment boost lapsed, and
nearly 30 million
Americans continue to file for weekly unemployment benefits. To work around stalled negotiations in Congress, President Trump has issued an executive order enabling states to apply for aid through FEMA to provide unemployed Americans with $300 per week in federal unemployment bonuses; much less than what was being provided before, but still generous in the context of regular unemployment benefits.
Thirty states have been approved
for aid, but only a few have actually begun rolling these payments out.
This $300 check to families and workers may just be enough
to keep them afloat for now, but that is the problem: It only keeps them
afloat. Even an expanded weekly payment from the next stimulus bill isn’t
enough to help these Americans prepare for the uncertain labor market they will
have to navigate for years to come. If we want to restore our economy and make
it more resilient to future recessions, we need a better plan. We need to
create an economy that capitalizes on the assets of our labor force and invests
in them so people not only are able to regain and sustain employment but also have
the skills to be independent and productive in the future.
Via Reuters
Congress will soon return from recess to restart negotiations around the
HEROES
and
HEALS Act
. Both bills make provision for renewing and extending pandemic unemployment assistance and reinforcing the struggling state unemployment insurance systems but avoid more substantive, longer-term reforms. Instead, both the House and Senate have opted to add money to existing program funding streams that, even in the best times, are not noted for their strong performance. With massive need and a potentially chaotic labor market, this seems an ill-advised approach that might result in a public workforce system buckling the way the UI systems did early in the crisis.
To provide a better path forward, our team recently published a report: “
A roadmap to reemployment in the COVID-19 economy: Empowering workers, employers, and states
.” This report outlines two important pillars of change that are needed in the workforce system: state flexibility and worker support. State flexibility shifts control of any emergency workforce monies from local workforce boards to state leaders, allowing for strategic investments in regional economies and the ability to quickly shift in the face of emerging, unforeseen circumstances like sudden flares in COVID-19 that might lead to local and regional shutdowns. Under this structure, governors could work with local governments to ensure funds are allocated to programs and workers in areas of greatest need and opportunity. On top of this, the plan would provide resources to states to update and improve labor market information systems that better reflect real-time supply and demand for skills in local economies.
For worker support, our proposal outlines a plan for
Personal Reemployment Accounts (PRAs) that help pay for training programs and
supportive services like child care that can help to smooth the return to work.
Unlike traditional training accounts issued through the federal government, PRA
dollars would not be restricted to a pre-approved list of training programs and
instead would be available for any program providing an industry-recognized
credential. PRAs would allow workers who are ready to enter training or return
to their jobs with resources to meet their immediate goals and reserve
workforce system capacity for those with multiple barriers to employment.
With the course of the COVID-19 pandemic uncertain and unprecedented needs among workers for training and other assistance, government can be of the greatest help by implementing solutions that assist people in moving from unemployment to reemployment along the pathway that best suits their individual needs.