PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Great American Jobs Reshuffle | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Key Points
The June 2021 American
Perspectives Survey (APS) finds that people’s work arrangements and preferences, unemployment experiences, and career
aspirations are changing as workers navigate the new post-pandemic labor market.
Despite
slow employment growth, a resounding majority (75 percent) of those unemployed
for two years or less are currently looking or plan to look for work.
At
the same time, the unemployed are more pessimistic about finding quality jobs. Nearly
three-quarters of Americans say now is a good time to find a quality job, but
only 53 percent of unemployed workers agree.
Eighty-six percent of Americans now say that
workplace flexibility is a key factor in choosing a new job. It’s
especially important for mothers working full-time.
Read the PDF.
Introduction
March 13, 2020, may go down as a key inflection
point in American economic history. The COVID-19 pandemic shuttered countless
businesses, brought economies to a halt, and has killed more than 600,000
Americans and over four million people worldwide
as of early summer 2021.
1
Real gross
domestic product fell
by over 30 percent in the second quarter of 2020. The service-providing
sector, which accounts for over 78 percent of the American workforce, contains
many of the sectors that have been hit hardest.
2
Whether businesses shuttered temporarily due to health concerns or
folded completely, millions of Americans, many of whom had never been
unemployed before, found themselves without work or the prospect of finding
work.
Federal and state governments
responded to this crisis with
unprecedented efforts to try to ensure that American families had resources to survive
and that the US economy had the aggregate demand required to prevent a
full-scale collapse. Over the past year, the US government has spent $764 billion
on unemployment compensation benefits, $968 billion on payroll subsidies to
struggling firms, and $867 billion in stimulus payments to individuals and
families.
3
Businesses responded to the pandemic threat by shifting quickly to
remote-working arrangements to protect workers and comply with government
stay-at-home orders. At least temporarily, COVID-19 has changed the rules about
how Americans work and what happens to them and their government benefits, such
as unemployment compensation, when they lose their jobs.
As highly effective vaccines and declining
infection rates have taken hold, a tentative new normal is emerging. Fueled by over a year of pent-up
consumer demand, factories are ramping up production, and once-shuttered
stores, businesses, and service and hospitality firms are reopening. This
national economic restart, and a backlog of consumer demand, has generated
enormous demand for workers. In its most
recent US Department of Labor Job Opportunities and Labor Turnover
Summary report, the federal government reported a record-breaking 9.2 million
open positions, theoretically approaching enough jobs to provide employment for
the over 9.5 million Americans who are currently looking for work.
4
Given this context, it has come as an additional
shock to the patterns of American working life that the unemployed have been
slow to return to jobs. After a robust March labor report showing 916,000 new
jobs created, subsequent reports have been disappointing, with the economy
averaging about 560,000 over the past three months.
5
Media coverage of the job market
has focused on the difficulties employers are having persuading workers even to
apply for work. The act of “ghosting,” whereby would-be employees accept a job
and then fail to show up on the first day, has occurred more frequently. Even
unprecedented signing bonuses have failed to attract workers, further
frustrating both employment growth and business owners.
6
Numerous explanations for post-pandemic work
hesitancy have been posited, such as healthier savings accounts boosted by
federal stimulus checks, lingering fear of
contracting coronavirus, and increased family demands. One of the
most prominently discussed potential reasons for the slow return to work has
been unemployment insurance (UI) benefits. Business owners and some economists have
argued that when Congress and the Donald Trump and Joe Biden
administrations boosted unemployment compensation (first by $600 last spring
and then to $300 in December 2020), the effect was to pay people more through unemployment
benefits than they could earn at work, thus creating a disincentive for job seeking.
7
While evidence is mixed on the degree of the disincentive effect of increased
UI benefits, most agree that the disincentive is real and operates with other
factors that continue to discourage work in the post-pandemic environment.
8
The June American Perspectives
Survey of 2,422 American adults,
including an oversample of 406 people who are currently unemployed, lends new
insights about what Americans think about work, the job market, and their
employment experiences during the pandemic. It also looks at how much they are
actively seeking work and, if they are not seeking work, why.
Among the jobless, two
subgroups emerge: those who were
unemployed before the pandemic and those who were not.
9
Nearly half (47 percent) have been
unemployed for two years or more. These Americans were not working before
COVID-19 and thus, their employment situation shouldn’t be viewed as a product of pandemic stay-at-home orders
or business closures. Consistent with other research
findings, the chronically unemployed are most likely to say they are not working because they either have a
disability preventing them from retaining
work or are caring for family members.
10
A majority (68 percent) of chronically unemployed workers are not planning to seek a
job in the next six months, placing them outside the labor force entirely. However, some chronically unemployed workers are interested in returning to work, and many are interested in
workplace flexibility. A majority (74
percent) of the chronically unemployed say
that being able to work remotely when they
want is an important factor when choosing a job. However,
some have already adapted to create their own flexible workplaces. About one-third (35 percent) of Americans who have been unemployed for more than two years report they do something extra to earn money that is not their household’s primary source of
income.
The experience is different
for the half of the currently unemployed who became unemployed during or shortly before COVID-19. While
under normal conditions, the median
unemployment duration is just over nine weeks, COVID-19 prolonged the average
time horizon to 20 weeks.
11
Some workers lost their jobs or had
their hours cut due to the economic slowdown
from the pandemic. Sixteen percent left work to take care of family
members. Regardless of their reason for currently being out of work, they are mostly
interested in returning. A resounding
majority (75 percent) are currently looking or plan to look for work
over the next six months.
These new, pandemic-era unemployed are disproportionately
younger, are lower income, and have lower educational attainment than the general
public does. Black and Hispanic respondents represent a disproportionate number
of the pandemic unemployed—those who have been out of work for the past two years. Black and Hispanic Americans make
up 22 and 24 percent of the pandemic
unemployed, respectively, but just 12 and 16 percent of the general
population, respectively.
The pandemic flipped the ratio of long- to
short-term unemployed on its head. In January 2020, about only 20 percent of
the unemployed population were without jobs for more than six months.
12
Today, 80 percent of the current
unemployed population has been unemployed for longer than six months. What
appeared initially as frictional unemployment now looks a good deal like
conditions typically seen in structural unemployment.
13
Now that the labor market is rebounding and help wanted signs are appearing at businesses that were once shuttered, the unemployment long haul has inevitably reshuffled financial needs, work aspirations, and the very nature of work. Workers are looking at a new set of cards and preferences.
Read the full report.
Notes
World
Health Organization, “WHO Coronavirus (COVID-19) Dashboard,”
https://covid19.who.int/
.
US Bureau of Economic Analysis, “Gross Domestic Product
(Third Estimate), GDP by Industry, and Corporate Profits (Revised), 1st Quarter
2021,” June 24, 2021,
https://www.bea.gov/news/2021/gross-domestic-product-third-estimate-gdp-industry-and-corporate-profits-revised-1st
; and Congressional Research Service, “Unemployment Rates
During the COVID-19 Pandemic,” June 15, 2021,
https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R46554.pdf.
Peter
G. Peterson Foundation, “Legislation Enacted to Combat the Corona Virus
Pandemic,” March 2021,
https://www.pgpf.
org/blog/2021/03/heres-everything-congress-has-done-to-respond-to-the-coronavirus-so-far
.
For
the May report, see US Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Job Openings and Labor
Turnover Summary,” June 8, 2021, https:// www.bls.gov/jlt/#news; and US Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Employment Situation Summary,”
July 2, 2021,
https://www.bls.gov/
news.release/empsit.nr0.htm.
US Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Employment Situation
Archived News Releases,” 2021,
https://www.bls.gov/bls/news-release/
empsit.htm#2021
.
Korn Ferry, “Being ‘Ghosted’ . . . by a New Hire,”
https://www.kornferry.com/insights/this-week-in-leadership/being-ghosted-by-a-new-hire
.
Jim
Garner, “New COVID-19 Unemployment Benefits: Answering Common Questions,” US
Department of Labor, January 11, 2021,
https://blog.dol.gov/2021/01/11/unemployment-benefits-answering-common-questions.
Jed
Kolko, “The Impact of Coronavirus on US Job Postings Through June 18: Data from
Indeed.com,” Indeed, Hiring Lab, June 22, 2021,
https://www.hiringlab.org/2021/06/22/job-postings-through-june-18-2021/
;
and Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau and Robert G. Valletta, “UI Generosity and Job
Acceptance: Effects of the 2020 CARES Act,” Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco, June 2021,
https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/files/wp2021-13.pdf
.
For our survey, the term “unemployed” is applied to all
those not currently working but are not yet retired. This differs from the
standard definition of the unemployed, which does not account for those who are
out of the labor force and not actively searching for work. This definition
allows for parsimonious terminology in analyzing the full portion of the
population that is not working. Those unemployed for longer than two years will
be referred to as “chronically unemployed” people, and “pandemic unemployed” is
defined as those who entered the pandemic unemployed or became unemployed just
before, at the beginning, or during the pandemic. This encompasses a time frame
of those who have been unemployed for less than two years.
Josh
Mitchell, “Who Are the Long-Term Unemployed?,” Urban Institute, August 20,
2013,
https://www.urban.org/research/
publication/who-are-long-term-unemployed
; and Eduardo Porter, “Why Aren’t
More Women Working? They’re Caring for Parents,” New York Times, August 29,
2019,
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/29/business/
economy/labor-family-care.html.
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, “Unemployed Persons by
Duration of Unemployment: Monthly, Seasonally Adjusted,”
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/release/tables?eid=3142&rid=50
.
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, “Unemployed Persons by
Duration of Unemployment.”
“Frictional
unemployment” refers to when people are temporarily unemployed, either because
they are new to the job market or are searching for a better job. “Structural
unemployment” is caused when patterns of production change (e.g., automation,
trade, and offshoring of production) that leaves workers without a market for
their skills. The labor market impacts of COVID-19 began as an emergency but
are morphing into a standoff between employers and workers who are
renegotiating both wages and working conditions during the economic restart,
creating a mixed bag of frictional and structural factors.
Read the report on the Survey Center on American Life website.