PAGE_TITLE: 
	Workforce Strategy for the ‘post-unicorn’ Age | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

The tight labor market is starting to force changes in employer talent development attitudes, behaviors, and strategies. The
Wall Street Journal
reported last weekend on CEOs moving from a passive, “go find me a unicorn” human resources approach to a deliberate effort to upskill their own workforces.
Via Twenty20.
The Journal highlighted the stories of several workers who started their jobs with little post-secondary education but a great deal of personal drive. Their companies responded to this combination of talent, energy, and perseverance with opportunities to advance through community college, undergraduate degrees and, in one case, an MBA program. The result is the kind of mobility-in-place, a once common and expected feature of American work-life, which was becoming increasingly rare. As one employee said, “This is no longer a dead-end job.”
The Journal’s reporting echoes other instances of employers taking ownership of their own shifting workforce needs. Companies like AT&T find themselves caught in the double-squeeze of an aging workforce and rapidly changing, technology-driven skill demands. The company’s
Workforce 2020
initiative is cross-leveraging these problems by upskilling younger workers while creating job security for older workers who maintain legacy systems as they move toward retirement. Between 2013 and 2016, AT&T spent $30 million annually on tuition assistance to improve technology skills in its existing workforce.
What these trends add up to is a much-needed boost in employer engagement in workforce issues. In a human capital-rich society like the US, it can sometimes appear that talent appears from nowhere. In reality, it is a difficult and expensive good to produce. Our families, civil society organizations, and schools need to do a better job at early formation of basic skills and work ethic, but it is also important to have employers in the fight making the most of the human capital we have.