PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Pandemic Class: College Graduates Enter Job Market Suddenly Turned Upside Down | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Nearly 4 million college students are
expected to graduate next month into an economic
landscape
that the coronavirus pandemic has rendered
unrecognizable.
The
Class of 2019 entered a
tight labor market with 3.7% unemployment
.
Today, in the wake of strict social distancing, the economy has been put into
what economists call a “suppression,” a deliberate slowing designed to limit
the spread of disease and give hospitals and health workers a chance to manage
limited resources across hundreds of thousands of new patients.
To
call this employment market unfriendly to new college graduates feels
inadequate. Social distancing requirements and “shelter-in-place” rules mean
that large parts of the economy are in lockdown,
resulting in nearly 17 million new unemployment
filings
in three weeks.
Analysts
say even that
staggering number may significantly
understate the pace of layoffs and furloughs
. As the
overwhelmed unemployment system catches up, we might see that these early
figures are just the beginning, with much larger layoff numbers arriving as the
full impact of the suppression is felt.
Incomes
reduced for years
At the
height of the Great Recession, many millennials found themselves underemployed
and working in the service sector, volunteering to do years of service
domestically and abroad, or going to graduate school to either wait out the
recession or make their résumé more marketable. Research shows that
graduating in a recession often
results in reduced
earnings for the next 10 to 15 years
. These effects
are further magnified for those with lower levels of education and include
worse social and health outcomes.
But this time is different.
Unlike the 2008-09 recession,
service sector jobs are severely constrained
as restaurants, coffee shops and bars suspend
operations, further reducing employment opportunities that might serve as a
bridge to better paying jobs and careers.
Students are understandably worried,
as a recent New York Times
story demonstrates
: “Andres
Salerno, a senior at Butler University in Indianapolis, stayed in his
off-campus house after classes went online, one of only a few remaining
undergrads in what feels like a ghost town. Practically everyone he knows is
anxious about the job market. Some of his roommates are Peace Corps recruits
who don’t know whether they’ll be able to leave the country. His girlfriend is
a dancer whose professional auditions have been canceled. … ‘Everyone has a
different job or career and all of it’s upended,’ he said. ‘I had a loose
idea of what I was doing in a few months. And now I’m just looking into the
void.’ “
Bright spots can be found,
however, even in this COVID-19 economy. Many companies with the ability to
provide services and products remotely,
such as Walmart, Amazon
and
startup firms
, are still hiring. Campus recruitment fairs are now
online, and job interviews are being held over Zoom and other video
communications platforms. Online retailers, pharmaceutical companies and tech
companies continue to advertise
new positions during the pandemic.
Be
creative in job search
The
best advice to graduating seniors is to be flexible. As they complete their
academic career online from their homes and prepare to enter the labor
market, they will need to be creative in their use of online job searching
tools. LinkedIn and university alumni services remain valuable assets in making
connections in industries and raising one’s profile in a “buyers’ market” for
jobs.
Also
useful is understanding how company hiring needs are morphing during this
crisis. Emsi, a labor market analytics firm, has
a job postings dashboard
that can be
helpful to students tracking opportunities across regions and industries.
Finally,
students should continue to enroll in online classes to broaden and diversify
their skills and build their résumé, not only in the current economic
conditions but also for when the economy restarts. Those who lack tech
credentials would be well advised to collect them through
online
training courses
.
Life
comes at us fast, and rarely faster than it is now. Stock prices have been
battered, and a historically robust labor market is in an unprecedented
contraction. The best advice — from economists and public health officials — is
patience as we try to bring the job market back online in the coming months.
In the
meantime, a little sympathy is in order for the Class of 2020 as they navigate
a world turned upside down.