PAGE_TITLE: 
	A Modern Solution in Higher Education | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

As progressive candidates clamor for expansive and infeasible
“college-for-all,” Modern States, a nonprofit, is using the power of technology
and old-fashioned philanthropic ingenuity to make college education easier and
cheaper.
Modern States was created several years ago by Steven Klinsky, philanthropist and founder and CEO of New Mountain Capital, as a platform to offer students access to online college courses taught by professors at leading institutions around the country. The courses include lectures, quizzes, online textbooks, and other support materials — all for free. Students are then able to take AP and CLEP exams that, if passed, qualify them for college credit at thousands of universities. Modern States has even offered to reimburse test fees for thousands of students who take the corresponding exams. Since its founding in 2015, more than 200,000 people have registered for courses through the Modern States system, and the organization has paid for nearly 40,000 CLEP exams.
Students hold up signs as they attend a demonstration calling for lower tuition at Hunter College in the Manhattan borough of New York November 12, 2015.  Via REUTERS/Carlo Allegri
Some traditional colleges are warming to Modern States as a way to shorten the pathway to a college degree and reduce tuition costs. Purdue University
recently announced
a partnership with Modern States to launch the
Purdue Fast Start program
, an initiative to expand education access to students who may not consider attending college or would face significant financial barriers when choosing to do so. As a part of the program, students who meet the baseline attendance requirements at the university, complete at least five courses through Modern States, and pass the corresponding CLEP exams are guaranteed admission to Purdue. Notably, the program is available to anyone, so adult learners can participate along with high school students. According to the university, those who complete the requirements will save at least $11,000 in tuition costs.
As I have
written
before, an overwhelming majority of labor market evidence points to the economic benefit of post-secondary education and especially undergraduate degrees. College degree-holders
consistently out-earn
less educated workers on average, and these returns largely persist over time. Whether those results are from the degree or the persistence required to get the degree is a matter of dispute — but the income realities remain the same.
In light of this, expanding pathways to post-secondary education and reducing costs associated with college degrees matters a great deal. While still in a nascent stage, Modern States represents a model worth watching in the months and years to come, especially in light of a growing
body of research
suggesting that students who earn credit through prior learning assessments like CLEP are more likely to complete their degrees than students who do not. Much research needs to be done to analyze student outcomes and address the
possible pitfalls
of online versus in-person education, but the program’s potential — especially for those without clear alternatives — offers optimism for a potential new approach to increasing knowledge and skills in the workforce.