PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Volunteer State Goes for a Test Drive on Criminal Justice | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Earlier this
month, Governor Bill Lee (R-TN) signed two bills — the Alternatives
to Incarceration Act and the Re-Entry Success Act — significantly reforming
both the front and back ends of the state’s criminal justice system.
The Alternatives to Incarceration Act aims to keep people out of prison who do not require incarceration and may be made more likely to commit additional crimes following release from prison. The Re-Entry Success Act seeks to ease the process of reintegration following a prison sentence through changes to parole practices and the reduction of disincentives to hiring people with criminal records. These reforms are projected to save the state
millions of taxpayer dollars
through reduced prison populations. More than the money, these bills address important concepts that I and other criminal justice researchers have focused on.
Via Twenty20
The
first bill
looks for ways to lower levels of incarceration by diverting from prison individuals with drug convictions, mental health problems, and other nonviolent offenses. This kind of legislation recognizes that imprisonment should be the final resort rather than the first. Putting people in prison — especially those who pose comparatively little threat to the community — is
expensive
and often
counterproductive
. Taxpayers get a better return at a lower cost by using non-carceral methods to deal with many of these challenges. These policies also help to ensure that a prison cell is available when needed by reserving spots for those who must be isolated for the sake of the community’s safety.
The
second bill
addresses a key interest of mine: reentry. It has three main provisions dealing with parole, reentry, and employment of individuals with criminal records. The bill seeks to make parole available to more people by preventing parole boards from imposing conditions or limitations without the concurrence of the Department of Corrections. Regarding reentry, the bill requires inmates eligible for parole be released to reentry supervision one year prior to the end of their sentence, and it ensures that all returnees receive supervision at the conclusion of their sentences. This mandatory supervision is not meant to trip people up — the bill specifically states that noncriminal technical violations will not be a reason for re-incarceration, which significantly reduces the “stickiness” of the criminal justice system all by itself. Finally, employment provisions help to reduce the risk of lawsuits against employers for hiring individuals with criminal records who subsequently commit crimes against coworkers or customers.
Perhaps the most remarkable thing about this legislation is its state of origin. If a tough-on-crime state like Tennessee can undertake these types of changes, then the door should be open to similar reforms elsewhere on the state and national level. It’s also another example of how our laboratories of democracy in state governments are moving forward with reforms that other states and the federal government can learn from.