PAGE_TITLE: 
	STEM Perspectives: Attitudes, Opportunities, and Barriers in America’s STEM Workforce | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Event Summary
On August 19, AEI’s Brent Orrell and Daniel A. Cox discussed their recent report, “STEM perspectives: Attitudes, opportunities, and barriers in America’s STEM workforce.” Orrell then led a panel  discussion with Audrey Van Belleghem of Facebook and Nicol Turner Lee of the Brookings Institution. They discussed STEM’s diversity issues and explored possible solutions.
Dr. Lee highlighted long-standing problems in STEM recruitment, including why groups of color are not present in the industry. She pointed to problems in the pipeline from elementary school upward that dissuade black and Latino students and discussed the need for deliberate conversations about including diverse communities.
Ms. Van Belleghem noted the discrepancy between the struggles of underrepresented populations and an unaware majority. She spoke about going beyond recruiting and how companies need to create better work environments to address attrition. Ms. Van Belleghem also addressed female workforce gains while acknowledging there is much work left to achieve parity for black and Latino workers.
The event concluded with audience questions.
— Anik Joshi
Event Materials
Brent Orrell and Daniel A. Cox: “STEM perspectives: Attitudes, opportunities, and barriers in America’s STEM workforce”
Event Description
Last year, AEI’s Daniel Cox and Brent Orrell surveyed nearly 1,400 STEM-educated Americans. Among other findings, the survey suggests there are two STEM workforces: one with relatively high levels of education, skill, control, and advancement (mainly white or Asian and male) and a second that struggles with perceived disadvantages, including women, African Americans, and Latinos.
During this web event, Dr. Cox will provide a presentation of the report. Mr. Orrell will then moderate a panel discussion with the Brookings Institution’s Nicol Turner Lee and Facebook’s Audrey Van Belleghem on the report’s implications and ways to create a more inclusive STEM workforce.
VIDEO