PAGE_TITLE: 
	Empowering American Workers: A Discussion with Reps. Andy Barr (R-KY) and Mike Johnson (R-LA) | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Event Summary
On September 30, AEI’s Matt Weidinger moderated a discussion between Reps. Mike Johnson (R-LA), chair of the Republican Study Committee (RSC), and Andy Barr (R-KY), chair of RSC’s American Worker Task Force (AWTF). The discussion focused on AWFT’s recent report suggesting over 100 policy reforms that would aid and empower American workers. Following Mr. Weidinger’s introduction, the congressmen discussed the importance of empowering American workers to achieve the benefits of work, community, and inclusion in society.
After moderating a Q&A with the congressmen, Mr. Weidinger joined a panel featuring AEI’s Brent Orrell, Angela Rachidi, and Ryan Streeter and moderated by AEI’s Scott Winship. While the scholars supported some of the proposed policies, they felt certain areas could be expanded or focused on, including diversifying noncollegiate and K–12 education and reforming Temporary Assistance for Needy Families. They disagreed  over how best to handle labor and unemployment policies as the economy recovers from COVID-19. The event concluded with Q&A.
— Jillian Wheeler
Event Description
While poverty and unemployment were historically low for many groups before the pandemic hit, long-standing roadblocks in education, labor, welfare, and other policies made it difficult for too many individuals to find stable, good-paying jobs that are essential to achieving self-sufficiency and realizing the American dream. These roadblocks were only compounded by the economic downturn brought on by COVID-19.
Join AEI’s Matt Weidinger as he leads a discussion on overcoming those roadblocks with two leaders of the House Republican Study Committee, Chairman Mike Johnson (R-LA) and American Worker Task Force Chairman Andy Barr (R-KY). They will review the task force’s recent report titled “Reclaiming the American Dream: Proposals to Empower the Workers of Today and Tomorrow.” Following their discussion, a panel of AEI experts will analyze the proposed policies in-depth.
VIDEO
Agenda
10:30 AM
Opening remarks:
Matt Weidinger,
Rowe Fellow, AEI
10:35 AM
Discussion
Panelists:
Andy Barr,
US House of Representatives (R-KY)
Mike Johnson,
US House of Representatives (R-LA)
Moderator:
Matt Weidinger,
Rowe Fellow, AEI
11:10 AM
Q&A
11:15 AM
Discussion
Panelists:
Brent Orrell,
Resident Fellow, AEI
Angela Rachidi,
Rowe Scholar, AEI
Ryan Streeter,
Director of Domestic Policy Studies, AEI
Matt Weidinger,
Rowe Fellow, AEI
Moderator:
Scott Winship,
Director of Poverty Studies, AEI
11:55 AM
Q&A
12:00 PM
Adjournment