PAGE_TITLE: 
	Neurodiversity and the Future of Work | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

VIDEO
Event Summary
On October 18, AEI’s Brent Orrell, Jessica Lee of NeuroTalent Works, Jose H. Velasco of SAP, Scott Michael Robertson of the US Department of Labor, and Alix Generous, a neurodiversity activist, discussed the future of neurodiversity in the workplace. The conversation examined the universal design framework, which sets a foundation for how inclusive work benefits neurodivergent workers and the workforce overall.
The panelists discussed the role of the private sector and employers in redefining talent and constructing inclusive hiring practices and workplaces. They also discussed how remote work and technological advancement affect neurodivergent workers. They covered the role of public policy and the federal government in incentivizing neurodiverse workplaces and linking neurodivergent workers to employment opportunities. Panelists also shared personal experiences in the workplace and strategies for navigating the workplace as a neurodivergent individual.
— Jessie Wall
Event Description
Every year, 50,000 American children on the autism spectrum reach their 18th birthday, yet 80 percent of these young adults will be, and currently are, unemployed. Neurodivergent individuals include those on the autism spectrum and those with bipolar disorder, dyslexia, dyspraxia, and several other intellectual and developmental differences. These individuals face unique challenges in the labor market, issues which are only growing more complex with the rise of remote work, automation, and the prioritization of noncognitive skills.
AEI’s Brent Orrell and Jessica Lee of NeuroTalent Works will offer remarks on the state of neurodiversity in employment. Panelists will then discuss the future of neurodiverse work, the private sector’s efforts to promote neurodiversity in hiring processes and workplace environments, and the role of public policy in addressing the barriers for neurodivergent individuals in the workplace.