PAGE_TITLE: 
	On the Front Porch with Brent Orrell and Tony Pipa: A Conversation with Carol Graham | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

VIDEO
Event Summary
On March 14, AEI’s Brent Orrell and the Brookings Institution’s Tony Pipa hosted Carol Graham, also of the Brookings Institution, to discuss her book,
The Power of Hope: How the Science of Well-Being Can Save Us from Despair.
This conversation was part of the “On the Front Porch with Brent Orrell and Tony Pipa” series hosted by AEI and the Brookings Institution.
Mr. Orrell, Mr. Pipa, and Dr. Graham discussed her research on the important role that hope plays in buoying individuals and communities from poverty and despair. Specifically, Dr. Graham discussed her work with adolescents in Peru and in St. Louis, Missouri, for whom having high aspirations for their futures resulted in better outcomes.
The panel also discussed the prevalence of loneliness and recent declines in civic engagement and social trust across the US. They considered the social and economic factors that have contributed to these trends and analyzed their impacts on various demographics, including black Americans, white Americans, immigrants, low-income Americans, and rural Americans. Finally, they discussed possible ways to boost hope in struggling communities, such as through investing in public services and the arts. Following this discussion, the event ended with a Q&A.
—David Veldran
Event Description
Contemporary differences between rural and urban areas in America have their roots in long-term demographic, economic, technological, and social factors. In a new event series, AEI’s Brent Orrell and the Brookings Institution’s Tony Pipa are hosting conversations “On the Front Porch” with authors of recent research on issues facing rural America. These discussions will explore the unique challenges and opportunities facing rural America and consider policy options to promote development and opportunity outside the nation’s major metropolitan areas.
For this conversation, Mr. Orrell and Mr. Pipa will be “on the front porch” with economist Carol Graham, whose recent
book
,
The Power of Hope: How the Science of Well-Being Can Save Us from Despair
, discusses the role that hope plays in supporting the development of individuals and communities in America. According to Dr. Graham, hope can reinvigorate communities and save them from ruinous “deaths of despair.”
Event Materials
Carol Graham:
The Power of Hope: How the Science of Well-Being Can Save Us from Despair