PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Gordian Knot of Unemployment Benefits | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

The battle of anecdotes surrounding the federal COVID-19
unemployment benefits has begun. On one side, people are claiming that the
policy is creating perverse, anti-work incentives and tensions between low-wage
workers and employers who can’t match the generosity of the benefit. On the
other side, there are reports of workers who bitterly resent how little even
the expanded benefits replace of lost income and complaints that the
government-mandated work stoppage is forcing them to dip into savings and
forego health insurance. What’s a policy wonk to do?
It’s important to remember why Congress adopted the $600 per
week supplemental unemployment benefit a few weeks back. With the nation
careening toward a viral health crisis and likely economic shutdown, these
supplemental benefits were
intended
to encourage workers to stay home to prevent the spread of disease. Workers,
frightened about catching COVID, responded positively to the combination of
stay-home orders and financial largesse. This combination of social distancing
and economic incentives has worked and is largely responsible helping the country
gain some limited control over the growth in caseloads and hospitalizations.
It’s a mission accomplished moment for public policy.
A man reads an unemployment form, as the outbreak of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues, in Miami Beach, Florida, U.S., April 8, 2020. REUTERS/Marco Bello
The challenge grows from the interaction between UI and the
Paycheck Protection Program and the continued need for so-called “essential
employees”. PPP is designed to support an ongoing relationship between workers
and their pre-COVID employers. The employers get loans to cover payroll rather
than releasing employees to sign up for unemployment benefits that can be
converted to grants if the employer maintains his or her “headcount”. Many
employees in PPP-covered firms, especially those at the low end of the wage
scale, see a missed opportunity as the enhanced UI pays more than their jobs
even if they don’t have to work. That’s a kind of negative incentive, although
it’s important to point out that there’s only a small moral difference between
not working and getting a check from your employer versus not working and
getting an even larger check from the government. Either way, government is
subsidizing non-work.
This brings us to the second prong of the enhanced UI
incentive problem. Even in the midst of a catastrophic health crisis and
economic meltdown, the American economy still needs labor in some categories.
The food-supply chain, delivery services like Amazon, and big retail outlets
like Walmart and CVS are among those hungry to hire. Theoretically, lower UI
benefits might encourage some of the unemployed to go back to work in new jobs
in those sectors. But remember the point of the enhanced UI benefits: to
encourage people to stay home and protect their health — as well as the health
of their families and broader communities. Until that imperative changes, the
moral burden is those who argue that, in a dangerous environment, people should
be leveraged back into workforce by reducing public subsidies targeted at
keeping people safe.
Only time and improvement in the health picture will
ultimately resolve this dilemma. Once we have effective medications to treat
COVID-19, it will make sense to encourage people to risk a return to work. Only
a vaccine and herd immunity can restore normal incentives. An interim measure
we might consider is “hazard-pay” that supplements wages for our essential
workers and draws people into the temporary jobs that are available. In the
meantime, let’s have an anecdote ceasefire which has the main purpose and
effect of highlighting tensions between those who can work, usually from home,
and those who either can’t work or put themselves at risk by doing so.