PAGE_TITLE: 
	Growing Fairly: A Book Event with Stephen Goldsmith | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

VIDEO
Event Materials
Event Transcript
Event Summary
On July 25, AEI’s Brent Orrell was joined by Stephen Goldsmith of the Harvard Kennedy School, Strada Education Network’s Stephen Moret, and University of Virginia’s Ben Wildavsky to discuss Mr. Goldsmith and Kate Markin Coleman’s book Growing Fairly: How to Build Opportunity and Equity in Workforce Development (Brookings Institution Press, 2022).
Mr. Goldsmith presented the core elements of the book, including what pieces come together to make people economically mobile and the common cause for a workforce system that works for more people in our current moment—defined by a large number of open jobs and people needing higher-quality and higher-paying jobs.
The panelists then spoke to the central needs in reforming the workforce system. Panelists covered how to increase the gauge of the workforce pipeline, how to construct a skills-as-currency system, the return to investment of college education, the importance of high-quality guidance, the role of credentials, and the need of regional intermediaries to coordinate the moving parts and some exemplary localities. The group also discussed the need to center the system on individuals, pointing to several programs that model this individual-centered approach.
—Jessie Wall
Event Description
Does today’s workforce system need to work for more Americans?
Fair growth requires rethinking how to provide workforce services to nontraditional workers, those without college degrees, and those with economic constraints. Stephen Goldsmith and Kate Markin Coleman’s new book, Growing Fairly: How to Build Opportunity and Equity in Workforce Development (Brookings Institution Press, 2022), explores how exactly we can achieve equitable growth. They suggest rethinking the workforce system so that government, nonprofits, and private industry more effectively work together and construct an individual worker-centered approach that can adjust to meet each individual’s unique circumstances.
Join AEI for a discussion on the book and on how various actors can partner with one another to construct a workforce system built to serve American workers’ distinct and constantly evolving needs.
Agenda
2:30 p.m.
Opening Remarks:
Brent Orrell
, Senior Fellow, AEI
2:35 p.m.
Presentation:
Stephen Goldsmith
, Derek Bok Professor of the Practice of Urban Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School
2:50 p.m.
Discussion:
Stephen Goldsmith
, Derek Bok Professor of the Practice of Urban Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School
Stephen Moret
, President and CEO, Strada Education Network
Ben Wildavsky
, Visiting Scholar, University of Virginia School of Education and Human Development
Moderator:
Brent Orrell
, Senior Fellow, AEI
3:30 p.m.
Q&A
4:00 p.m.
Adjournment