PAGE_TITLE: 
	Getting Smart on Prison Education | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Today’s criminal
justice system isn’t suitable for today’s level of crime. We live in a much
safer society than we did in the 1980s and 1990s, yet we still have an
excessively punitive system that is often more about signaling that we’re tough
on crime than it is about actually addressing crime.
Back in 1994, part of the signaling was cutting prisoner eligibility for Pell Grants — a bipartisan error that has taken a very long time to fix. Though Presidents Obama and Trump restarted Pell grant eligibility for prisoners on an experimental basis, the recent omnibus spending bill
restored
Pell grant eligibility for prisoners for the first time in over a quarter-century
This is an unambiguously positive step for multiple reasons. In 2016, the RAND Corporation
found
that inmates who are a part of educational programs “are up to 43 percent less likely to reoffend” and are “far more likely to find a job after their release, and the social stability that comes with it.” This saves money too — that same study found that spending $1 in education saves nearly $5 in reincarceration over three years.
Inmates study during their class at the Taconic Correctional Facility in Bedford Hills, New York April 8, 2016. Via REUTERS/Carlo Allegri
Some might argue that these results are thus only worth it for those who will be leaving prison, but education makes sense for people with life sentences too —
research has shown
that “incarcerated people who were enrolled in college classes committed 75% fewer infractions than incarcerated people who were not enrolled” and that education can also help break down racial barriers and make prisons easier to manage.
Beyond the fact that education is good in the abstract, reinstating Pell Grants will increase the diversity of educational opportunities available to prisoners. A lot of prison education focuses on technical education on the theory that when inmates return to society, they need a practical skill. What this perspective misses is how few people of any background actually have the interest and ability to take on what are highly demanding occupations in the skilled trades. Some need to focus on more basic skills like reading and math while others might benefit greatly from the study of the liberal arts. Highly innovative programs, like the Bard College Prison Initiative and the Prison Scholars Fund, have shown how literature, philosophy, history, the arts, and other undergraduate education can help people discover deeper reasons for seeking the “good life” and desisting from criminal behavior.
Of greatest importance is how increasing educational resources can help us shift from a strictly punitive understanding of incarceration to one that seeks to balance punishment for crimes with a commitment to rehabilitation and a hope for a better future. We need both as we walk the next mile in creating a safer, more compassionate, and more just society.