PAGE_TITLE: 
	Employer Resource Networks: Improving Employment Retention and Building Career Opportunities for Low-wage Workers | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Event Summary
On October 22, AEI’s Brent Orrell hosted a discussion about Employer Resource Networks (ERNs), an innovative tool to help lower-income employees. After a brief introduction from Mr. Orrell, H. Luke Shaefer presented his recent report on ERNs. The two then participated in a panel discussion and Q&A with James M. Vander Hulst of ERN USA and Jason Heyboer of Lacks Enterprises.
ERNs are meant to address high churn rates among lower-income employees, and the program has shown positive results. However, Dr. Shaefer warned that ERNs are not a silver bullet, but they are part of the solution. Mr. Vander Hulst discussed the importance of ERNs to employees. Lastly, Mr. Heyboer provided his perspective on the benefits of ERNs as an employer.
Given the uniquely painful impact of the COVID-19 economic crisis on low-income workers, ERNs and other tools that help lower-income workers and families will continue to be important as the economy slowly recovers.
— Anik Joshi
Event Description
Employer Resource Networks (ERNs) are a new way to address dual problems — unstable labor-market attachment among lower-income workers and the consequential employee churn. ERNs enhance employee productivity and increase retention and advancement.
Join AEI as H. Luke Shaefer discusses his recent report reviewing the ERN model, followed by a panel discussion moderated by Brent Orrell with Dr. Shaefer, Jason Heyboer of Lacks Enterprises, and James M. Vander Hulst of ERN USA.
LIVE Q&A: Submit questions to
Anik.Joshi@aei.org
or on Twitter with
#AEIonERN
.
VIDEO
Agenda
11:00 AM
Opening remarks:
Brent Orrell
, Resident Fellow, AEI
11:10 AM
Presentation of report:
H. Luke Shaefer
, Hermann and Amalie Kohn Professor of Social Justice and Social Policy, University of Michigan
11:30 AM
Discussion
Panelists:
Jason Heyboer
, Manager of Human Resources, Lacks Enterprises
James M. Vander Hulst
, President, ERN USA
H. Luke Shaefer
, Hermann and Amalie Kohn Professor of Social Justice and Social Policy, University of Michigan
Moderator:
Brent Orrell
, Resident Fellow, AEI
12:20 PM
Q&A
12:30 PM
Adjournment