PAGE_TITLE: 
	On the Front Porch Series | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

On the Front Porch Series
Contemporary differences between rural and urban America have their roots in long-term demographic, economic, technological, and social factors. In a new event series, AEI’s Brent Orrell and the Brookings Institution’s Tony Pipa host conversations “On the Front Porch” with authors of recent research on issues facing rural America. These discussions will explore the unique challenges and opportunities facing rural America and consider policy options to promote development and opportunity outside the nation’s major metropolitan areas.
Conversations in the Series
On the Front Porch with Brent Orrell and Tony Pipa: A Conversation with Nicholas F. Jacobs
On January 25, AEI’s Brent Orrell and the Brookings Institution’s Tony Pipa hosted the first of a series of conversations “On the Front Porch” with authors of recent research on issues facing rural America. Mr. Orrell and Mr. Pipa spoke with Nicholas F. Jacobs, the author of
The Rural Voter: The Politics of Place and the Disuniting of America
, a recent book that examines the state of politics in rural America.
Watch the event video
On the Front Porch with Tony Pipa and Brent Orrell: A conversation with Kathy Edin and Tim Nelson about ‘The Injustice of Place’
For their second conversation on February 8, 2024, Tony Pipa and Brent Orrell were “On the Front Porch” with authors Kathy Edin and Tim Nelson, whose recent book
The Injustice of Place: Uncovering the Legacy of Poverty in America
finds that America’s most disadvantaged communities are nearly all located in rural areas.
Watch the event video
On the Front Porch with Brent Orrell and Tony Pipa: A Conversation with Carol Graham
On March 14, Brent Orrell and Tony Pipa hosted Carol Graham, of the Brookings Institution, to discuss her book,
The Power of Hope: How the Science of Well-Being Can Save Us from Despair.
This conversation was part of the “On the Front Porch with Brent Orrell and Tony Pipa” series hosted by AEI and the Brookings Institution.
Watch the event video
On the Front Porch with Tony Pipa and Brent Orrell: A conversation with Elizabeth Currid-Halkett about ‘The Overlooked Americans’
On April 4, Tony Pipa and Brent Orrell held an event “On the Front Porch” with Elizabeth Currid-Halkett, whose recent book
The Overlooked Americans: The Resilience of Our Rural Towns and What It Means for Our Country
, reveals that rural America is more successful than outsiders often presume.
Watch the event video
About the Scholars
Brent Orrell
is a senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, where he works on job training, workforce development, and criminal justice reform. His research focuses on expanding opportunity for all Americans through improved work readiness and job training and improving the performance of the criminal justice system through rehabilitation and prisoner reentry programs.
Anthony F. Pipa (Tony)
is a senior fellow in the Center for Sustainable Development at the Brookings Institution. Tony launched and leads the Reimagining Rural Policy initiative. He also launched and leads the Local Leadership on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) initiative.