PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Jobs Report and What Comes Next | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Friday’s jobs report was full of surprises. After months of labor market contraction, millions went back to work. However, the widely reported 13.3 percent unemployment rate, which was in actuality
about three points higher
, remains disconcertingly high and demonstrates that we have a long, difficult road to get back to the economy of January 2020.
One of the big questions to be answered is how federal economic stimulus, support payments, and subsidies are affecting the recovery. The temporary lay-off figures may be an important clue. Over 2.7 million temporarily laid-off workers — almost all covered by the Paycheck Protection Program — appear to be the first back on the job.
Score one for PPP
.
Even more encouraging: Much
of the growth was in service sector employment, which accounts for 80 percent
of American jobs and has been hit disproportionately hard during the coronavirus
crisis. Employment in dentist’s offices was up nearly 60 percent, and
sightseeing/scenic transportation employment was up just over 30 percent. Even
some heavy industries and manufacturing concerns saw significant recoveries.
We can hope that employment
growth will continue and that the over-arching federal strategy of keeping
businesses alive but on ice can help bring about a much-hoped-for v-shaped
recovery. This isn’t the moment, however, for Congress and the administration
to relax. Instead, they should maintain and improve policies that appear to work
both for keeping people safe and getting them back to work.
This all brings me to a point I’ve been making since the pandemic and lockdowns hit. As much was we’d all like the pandemic to pass, it hasn’t. We’ve had 1.8 million infections and over 110,000 deaths. Infections are still growing at the pace of over 20,000 new cases per day. States that looked relatively stable, like California and Texas, and states that looked to later have things under control, like Florida, are seeing some
disquieting caseload rises
. In most major cities, we can expect to see continued and accelerated spread that will affect both health and actual and media-driven perception of risk.
It is thus unsurprising that many workers still feel
deep fear and anxiety
about returning to their workplaces. Most of the medical community continues to believe a second wave of infections in the fall is virtually inevitable, and
some argue
the next wave will be larger and more deadly. Against this backdrop, what do we do when businesses and workers disagree over safety issues? In most states right now, much of the power is in the hands of employers to demand employees
return or face
loss of state UI benefits and federal Pandemic Unemployment Assistance — the infamous $600 per week which has preoccupied lawmakers, especially Republicans, since it was instituted in March.
It is undoubtedly true
there are workers who will plead fear of the virus as a way to avoid work and
collect enhanced benefits. However, many others will have legitimate fears
related to workplace safety, underlying health conditions, or sick and
vulnerable family members. It is also true that there are business owners so
desperate to restart their operations that they might downplay or ignore
unacceptable risks in their establishments. In the event the two parties are
unable to reach an agreement, the answer is not for one to coerce the other.
Every state has an appeals system for unemployment disputes, and Congress
should be looking at ways of beefing up these resources to adjudicate
conflicting claims. This is a matter of both worker safety and fairness.
There’s much to celebrate in this month’s job report — especially after passing through some of the darkest economic days since the Depression. While we’re celebrating, let’s try to remember that COVID-19 is manifesting differently in different places and affecting individual workers businesses in unique ways. What we need now is wisdom and flexibility to ensure we help communities, businesses, and workers restart in the right way at the right time.