PAGE_TITLE: 
	How COVID Impacts the Disadvantaged | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Almost a month ago, the Strada Education Network released its new survey asking Americans various questions about how the pandemic is affecting them financially and psychologically. From the initial responses, I wrote about how a
majority of Americans are nervous about losing their job
. While that isn’t necessarily surprising, the pervasiveness of that feeling across education levels was.
In this week’s update of the Strada
survey, we see a demographic trend consistent with the morbidity rate of COVID-19:
The virus is affecting the pocketbooks and agitating the fears of
African-Americans, Asians, and Latinos to a greater degree than whites.
Overall, 62 percent of survey respondents are worried they will lose their job,
with whites at 57 percent. This jumps by at least 11 percentage points for African-Americans
(68 percent), Asians (72 percent), and Latinos (72 percent). A quarter of black
Americans in the survey have been laid off, outpacing whites (15 percent),
Asians (16 percent), and Latinos (22 percent). Two-thirds of Latinos (66
percent) have lost income, with the other demographic groups hovering around 50
percent.
People in cars wait in line to pick up unemployment forms, as the outbreak of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues, in Hialeah, Florida, U.S., April 8, 2020. Reuters
A handful of state and local leaders, acknowledging the precarious economic conditions, have sought to begin reopening parts of their economy. While some might believe this is great news for workers fearing unemployment or those currently without a job, front-line workers affected by the coronavirus seem less eager to clock-in. For instance, in response to Las Vegas Mayor Carol Goodman’s order to reopen businesses in her city, the Culinary Workers Union, with over half of its
Las Vegas membership identifying as black or Latino
,
condemned this order
. The union believes, as do I, that workers should not be forced to choose between preserving their health and paying their rent.
There are a number of ways to alleviate the anxiety of workers. In the short-term, employers should take concrete steps to protect their workforce as economies continue to reopen,
as my colleague Dr. Scott Gottlieb outlines
. In the long term, as future outbreaks or disruptive economic events occur, we need to identify new ways for workers to maintain connections with employers while waiting to return to their jobs. Last week, my colleague Mason Bishop and I published a piece in
The Hill
arguing that our unemployment system needs to move to a model that helps maintain the employer-employee relationship which we call “employment stabilization.” Employers would notify the state of a layoff and benefits would immediately begin flowing rather than requiring individual workers to file. This would prevent the
spectacle of the past few weeks
with workers unable to get through to state UI systems by telephone and internet. It would also make it easier for workers to return to their old jobs when conditions permitted with a simple notification to the state that they were back on payroll.
One of the benefits of the COVID crisis is the way it is revealing how vulnerable many of our workers and the systems that serve them are. We need to make sure that, where it really counts, this crisis doesn’t go to waste.