PAGE_TITLE: 
	The ‘platforms’ Aren’t the Problem. We Are. | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

The release of the
Senate Intelligence Committee’s reports
on Russian exploitation of social media platforms to try to influence the 2016 presidential election have prompted a familiar response. To prevent misinformation campaigns, we need to regulate social media. I will leave aside the question of whether we should be letting the Russians off the hook and, simultaneously, excusing the active encouragement of Russian interference by the Trump campaign. Instead, I’ll borrow from “Julius Caesar” to make my main point: The problem is not in the platforms, dear friends, but in ourselves and the ways the human mind interacts with the world around it.
Charles Murray, Iain McGilchrist, John Cleese, and Brent Orrell discuss “The Divided Brain” at AEI,
We explored this concern last month when Dr. Iain McGilchrist (“
The Master and His Emissary: The Divided Brain and the Making of the Western World
,” Yale Press, 2009) and actor John Cleese visited AEI for a screening of a
new documentary
based on Dr. McGilchrist’s book. As a thumbnail of Dr. McGilchrist’s theory, he argues that the two brain hemispheres pay attention to the world in different ways. The left hemisphere, like a smart computer, analyzes what it sees as a mass of detail without understanding the real world situation from which the information comes. The right is panoramic, scanning the horizon for the novel, seeking patterns and meaning in the constantly changing flow of perceptual inputs that make up our conscious experience, one that draws tentative conclusions based on broad patterns. Both are needed and important.
Evolution selected this divided structure because it permits humans and other animals to focus on narrow tasks, like looking for food, while keeping an eye out for predators who might try to make us their own lunch. This structure also supports group bonding and reproduction because the right brain is mainly “outward” looking and is responsible for guiding social interaction, activities the left brain is “blind” to. (For those who don’t have time or inclination to read a 600 page book that spans everything from brain science to the history of the Reformation, I highly recommend this Russ Roberts
EconTalk
podcast to get a general understanding of McGilchrist’s theory, or this even shorter
explainer video
.)
The problem, McGilchrist argues, is that the hemispheres are out of balance, with the narrower, more analytic, and, frankly, dogmatic left hemisphere overwhelming the broader, more relationally-minded, more insightful, right hemisphere. This imbalance is driven by long-term (over centuries) developments in cognition strategies that depend excessively on left-hemisphere processes. Like people with autism or Asperger’s syndrome, we are having difficulty seeing beyond our pet issues to understand the viewpoints and concerns of others or even to grasp the big picture rather than the data points. It’s also worth noting that the left hemisphere is in its own way emotional, and the emotion that lateralizes to the left most strongly is anger. “Myopic anger” might be a good summary of the political problems social media creates.
In my view, the kicker in this downward spiral is that social media technologies like Twitter, Instagram, Facebook, and others tend, in the way they fragment and distort information and virtualize interpersonal exchange, to strengthen the already-too-strong grip of left-brain cognitive processes. Life in a democratic society requires empathy, compassion, and compromise that the left side of the brain cannot, on its own, generate. The Russians — knowingly or not — figured out a way of using social media to exploit the hemispheric imbalance and the negative, self-reinforcing patterns of human thought that are on ready display in just about any contentious Twitter or Facebook exchange. Neither Vladimir Putin nor Donald Trump created this problem, but they are exploiting it, and us, to their considerable advantage.
As is typical in many public policy issues, rather than understanding and grappling with the underlying challenges — say, the overvaluing of narrow technical knowledge and skills and the diminishing of
noncognitive development
— we instead reach for a legislative or regulatory fix. With weak internal controls, we end up trying to impose external constraints. Hauling tech CEOs in for hearings may be a good way to build a political career but it leaves out the far larger and more important question of how we, as individuals, families, and communities, are failing to thoughtfully integrate digital technology into our lives.  A bit more introspection on our personal use of these tools — starting with the president and working all the way down — will be far better protection against election meddling than any congressional inquiry or new law.