PAGE_TITLE: 
	COVID-19 and the Fast-moving Workforce Revolution | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Before the pandemic, a
majority of Americans
worked the standard “grind”: 9-to-5, five days a week, plus hours more of commuting. For those caring for dependents like children or elderly parents, a rigid schedule like this can be especially harsh, imposing a struggle that requires constant and stressful juggling.
Via Twenty20
Last year’s remote work revolution took care of the 9-to-5 part — many workers are no longer going into the office at all — and it might do something about the five-days-a-week part as well. Recent data has shown a
slight uptick
in job postings offering four-day workweeks. Though the absolute numbers are still small, it’s a trend worth watching. As we’ve seen with remote work, a necessity like pandemic-induced remote work can easily become essential for both employers and workers. As remote work has expanded, it has become both an expectation and
a perk
that gets folded into standard employment packages.
In a tight labor market, it isn’t difficult to see how shorter workweeks could follow the same trajectory as remote work, as companies use this form of work flexibility to compete for talent. Awin, a technology company in Berlin, and Unilever-New Zealand have both moved their employees to four-day weeks. Thus far, the idea
has worked out pretty well
, increasing business performance and employee satisfaction, a recompense in the super-charged and, frankly, wearing work environment of the past year. And even if workers do not end up with a longer weekend, they might end up with a shorter workday. Adam Grant of the Wharton School
has advocated
ending the workday at 3PM (instead of 5PM) to help fix the misalignment between parents’ work hours and children’s school hours.
Scott Galloway, an entrepreneur and adjunct professor at the NYU Stern School of Business,
argues
that COVID-19 has collapsed a decade of economic and workforce transformation into a single year. The fears of lower productivity turned out to be
unfounded
, but this came at the cost of eroding the boundary between work and home — especially for parents who are dual-hatted as full-time workers and Zoom teaching assistants for their kids. Market-driven changes like flexible work weeks and hours — combined with school reopenings — hold the promise of a new, and more sustainable, equilibrium.