PAGE_TITLE: 
	Sympathy for the President? | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

The nation is absorbing the shocking, and yet somehow completely predictable, news that Donald Trump, 45th President of the United States, has contracted a serious case of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. If we add the President’s base to the vast middle of America, it’s safe to say that most Americans, regardless of political affiliation, are responding as expected: worried for him and for the country beset with public health, economic, and social crises just a month before a presidential election.
Our better angels tell us that no one deserves COVID even if some of our lesser angels insist that, in the case of man who has denied the pandemic and undermined efforts to control it, we might be justified in making an exception. The part of us that is built to desire justice imagines that this is some kind of karmic retribution. But we know the rain falls on the righteous and the unrighteous. Disease is a reflection of the human fragility not a sign of divine wrath. We all share in a future that includes our own demise either by accident, disease or age, and only those closest to us are likely to mourn or even notice our passing. This should help us resist any temptation to enjoy the suffering of another.
So, those of us who have opposed this presidency do not, or at least should not, rejoice in the President’s illness and we earnestly hope, or should, for his recovery as an expression of our common humanity. But a secondary question arises. To what degree should we feel
sympathy
for him as he struggles against the virus? This is not as simple a matter as it seems.
At the most basic level, it is extremely difficult to feel actual sympathy for a person or persons to whom one is not immediately connected. Adam Smith talked about this in the
Theory of Moral Sentiments
. He explained that we are far more moved at the prospect of losing our own little finger than we are of a story of thousands killed in an earthquake on the other side of the world. Proximity matters. There is a man, his name is Donald Trump, and he is ill with a potentially deadly virus. Were he not the president, it is unlikely that we would give much thought beyond hoping that he receives the care he needs at the hands of skilled physicians and is restored to health. This is how we have mostly dealt with others suffering from COVID. We remark upon the infections and death data, worry about the spread of the virus, skim through the obituaries of notable people who die from the disease, and return to our own lives and concerns and those to whom we are more intimately connected: our spouses, children, extended family and neighbors.
But Trump is the president, a man who has inhabited our psychic space continuously for years. We
feel
like we know him though he is mostly a projection onto the screen of public consciousness. He is both famous, ubiquitously present, and a complete stranger to all but a handful of people.
What happens to him is not a matter just for his him and his family. It carries consequences for the nation and the world. As the most powerful of the powerful men and women who move and shape our world, we are in some way dependent upon him and what he does. He has stirred deep and primal passions, many of them negative, and has done so deliberately as way to gain and keep the office he holds. More importantly, from my standpoint, he has spoken scarring and unspeakable words, attacked the innocent, and neglected and ignored the claims that human dignity makes upon us all. In the language of Adam Smith, he has disregarded and flouted normal sympathy, the mechanism of human exchange that shapes our moral sense as individuals and forms the hidden matrix of social cohesion. In the world of Donald Trump, the other-directedness that is built into our natures as a survival mechanism, which leads us to sacrifice our own interests to the interests of others, is not natural or even compatible with a world that has just one relevant characteristic: competition. For Trump, concern for the well-being of others is weakness, a province of life’s “suckers” and “losers”. Why should a man so bereft of the milk of human kindness have any claim on that of others?
As a Christian, I struggle, not always successfully, to forgive Trump this void in his personality. At the same time, I find my distaste for his cruelty and tendency to see every event through the lens of self-interest ameliorated by reflection on the kind of social and emotional deprivation required to create such a moral vacuum. What Mary Trump describes of Donald Trump’s childhood in her book,
Too Much and Never Enough: How My Family Created the World’s Most Dangerous Man
, is enough to make one shudder for Donald Trump the child. A chronically ill mother, and a father who was alternately absent and emotionally abusive, left Donald and his brother (the recently deceased Robert Trump) particularly bereft of the emotional warmth and support needed for learning how to establish stable, fruitful human relationships. She writes, “As a result of [Mary Trump’s absence and Fred Trump’s parenting style] his children were isolated not just from the rest of the world but from one another. From then on it would become increasingly difficult for the siblings to find solidarity with other human beings….” Trump, she says, was left at a vulnerable age with a choice between a poisonous relationship with his father or no parenting at all. Donald Trump could only find connection with his father by becoming the “killer” that was the only kind of person Fred Trump esteemed and would embrace.
Contra
John Donne, Donald Trump became, if not an island, part of a dysfunctional archipelago.
This toxic isolation and the emotional neutering that accompanied it is, I think, the main reason many of those outside the President’s immediate circle are struggling to feel genuine sympathy for Donald Trump at this hour. Sympathy is not a light switch that we turn on and off; it is, in the Smithian sense, a neurobiological habit built into us gradually over time. Most people who enter politics are naturally quite sympathetic. Feeling something of what others feel, or at least appearing to, is normally the price of admission to public life in a democratic society. A large part of why we care about presidential marriages, families, and pets is the signals they give us about the psychological and emotional stability of those who seek our highest office. For myriad contingent reasons, American voters in 2016 either didn’t see or deliberately dismissed the social-emotional hollowness, the inability to project human sympathy, in Donald Trump and settled for a promise of national renewal. In an important sense, many of his fellow citizens cannot give to him that which he has been unable to give to others because he never received it himself.
This is not to say Trump is entirely alone, even in a political sense, as suffers through this illness. Those who have bonded closely to him and his message no doubt feel much for him. For me, the most proximate feeling is a fatigue with the non-stop drama of the past four years and a sadness for a president and man who has disdained any sign of weakness in others and now faces his own hour of greatest need.