PAGE_TITLE: 
	Education and Training in the ‘gig’ Economy | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

No sooner had I posted
this praise of enlightened employer self-interest
than the Wall Street Journal ran a
second, longer article
that portrays employers as law-of-the-jungle Darwinians when it comes to how they treat their incumbent workforces.
Continuing education via Twenty20.
The article profiles six different workers who are straining every tendon trying to build their skills, often at their own financial and personal expense. Unlike the previous article, which looked at “old” economy manufacturing jobs, this piece focused primarily on “new” economy workers in online marketing, data analytics, and healthcare. What’s on display in these two articles is how much more rapidly skill demands are morphing in technology-driven sectors and the priority that employers place on combining specific, task-related skills with the capacity for human interaction.
Tim Salau, a University of Texas information science graduate, told the Journal he has taken dozens of “microcertifications” offered through
LinkedIn Learning
on workplace habits and personal branding. At Microsoft, he combines his technical and interpersonal skills to help design bots for customer service. Isabel Lemus, a hospital employee, took the reverse tack. Having worked as a hospital “ambassador” helping families navigate the health system, she began taking online courses on conflict management, business sustainability, and the specifics of the Zika virus. These additional skills landed her a more highly paid job supporting a top hospital manager.
This “gig” approach to training has advantages and disadvantages. First, it is far cheaper for the companies compared to sending employees to classroom training. Many of the firms profiled offered little or no financial incentive for upskilling, viewing it as the employee’s responsibility. This sounds somewhat harsh but it is an important test: is the employee sufficiently committed to learning to invest their own time and money in skill development? This reflects the reality that self-motivation and persistence are as highly valued in the labor market as the technical skills gained through the training.
Of course, an employee who invests their own time and discretionary income in building up skills, without some sort of contribution from their employer, may also feel fewer doubts about ditching their current job for another company offering marginally higher wages. Employers who complain about “
ghosting
” may want to consider the costs and benefits of investing in mutuality rather than focusing solely on the bottom line.