PAGE_TITLE: 
	Hidden Workers: Untapped Talent | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

VIDEO
Event Materials
Event Transcript
Event Summary
On April 25, AEI’s Joseph Fuller was joined by AEI’s Brent Orrell, Steve Preston of Goodwill Industries International, and Ardine Williams of Amazon to discuss Mr. Fuller’s fall 2021 report “Hidden Workers: Untapped Talent.” In today’s labor shortage, there are two jobs for every worker. Meanwhile, over 27 million hidden workers, including veterans, those formerly incarcerated, caregivers, and people with physical or mental challenges, are screened out of applicant pools for jobs that they are qualified for by technology-heavy hiring practices, and they face hiring rates as low as 1.7 percent.
The panelists, moderated by Brent Orrell, discussed how to reform hiring practices to incorporate hidden workers on the front end and how to ensure that, once hired, hidden workers are invested in and given the tools to succeed. Ms. Williams and Mr. Preston provided the practitioner lens of Amazon and Goodwill Industries International, respectively, discussing efforts around apprenticeship programs, upskilling, on-the-job training, collaboration with community colleges, and support for mentorship programs. Investing in hidden workers has lowered turnover, increased worker content, and improved worker productivity and ingenuity. The panelists agreed that hidden workers represent a crucial segment of human capital in which businesses can do well by doing good.
—Jessie Wall
Event Description
Approximately 27 million Americans are eager to find work but remain underemployed or unemployed due to hiring practices that keep them “hidden” from employers. Companies often screen hidden workers such as mothers, those with criminal records, neurodiverse workers, and other populations out of the applicant pools. This leads to underused skills that, if harnessed, would benefit workers and employers. Reforming hiring practices can uncover this missing pool of talent, close skills gaps, and improve workforce diversity.
Please join as AEI’s Joseph Fuller offers remarks based on the report “Hidden Workers: Untapped Talent” and AEI’s Brent Orrell moderates a discussion on strategies for hiring hidden workers, how to address barriers to entry, and the benefits of closing skills gaps and diversifying the workplace.