PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Remote Work Tug-of-war | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Kastle, a commercial access security vendor, has been tracking the
average weekly usage of entrances
to buildings they secure to gain a better understanding of workplace occupancy rates across the country. The company serves over 2,600 buildings in 138 cities, including the top 10 metropolitan statistical areas in the country using the data as a barometer for gauging the return to in-person offices.
In most cities, it’s been a very slow climb. As of the end
of April, Kastle’s weekly occupancy report found, on average, just 26 percent occupancy
in 10 major metro areas. In a few Texas cities (Dallas, Houston, and Austin),
occupancy approaches 40 percent. But in all surveyed cities, the trend line is
flat despite rapidly declining COVID cases and widespread vaccination. In the
New York City metro area, just 16 percent of the office space is filled.
The effects of these vacancies are beginning to roll “downhill”, for worse and better, to landlords and prospective subletters. In all the major markets,
rents are flat or down significantly
on a per square foot basis with even better deals available in the sub-lease market as companies try to cut their losses on unused space. In Houston, office space is averaging $31 per square foot in direct leases but just $22 per square foot on the sub-lease market.
What we’re witnessing seems to be an emerging tug-of-war between corporate leadership and their workforces involving corporate cultures, the competition for talent, and the economic benefits of remote work to corporate bottom lines. In a few sectors, mainly law and banking, the
pressure
to get workers back to their offices is high, a move that appears to be driven by a mix of tradition and a concern for new hires who need regular coaching on work practices and expectations.
Talent competition will likely have a major effect on whether the “back to the office” counter-offensive succeeds. Deutsche Bank, for instance, is working both sides of the street by simultaneously
granting flexible work
(two days in the office, three days out) while one of its leading economists
publicly backs
a proposal to impose new taxes on remote workers to help pay higher wages for in-person staff. Meanwhile, in the talent-dependent wild-west of the tech sector, leaders are
mostly yielding
to the demands of their workforces for permanent remote work or hybrid scheduling that combines work-from-home with “collaboration days” in the office. In the highly competitive market for technology talent at least, workers appear to be winning the flexibility argument.
As is true in most cases, it’s important to watch what people do rather than listen to what they say. According to a survey by Accenture, many business executives are planning to
shrink their corporate office footprint
by anywhere from 11 to 40 percent over the next several quarters. This suggests that pressure from their workforces for remote work, combined with lower overhead costs to businesses, will continue to support the trend toward distributed workforces.