PAGE_TITLE: 
	City of Poses | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Oregon is a beautiful state, and Portland is its most beautiful city.
I know this because I grew up in one of its suburbs, an idyllic cow-town and bedroom community, and spent an undergraduate year at Portland State University. It rains more or less continuously from October through May (Oregonians seem to have as many words for rain as Native Alaskans do for snow), but then you get to June and it’s nirvana: brilliant skies and long, warm days in a dry yet verdant City of Roses.
The urban growth boundary established in the 1970s restricts development and sprawl which leads to absurd prices for housing of all kinds. The advantage to this policy is that one is usually within a short drive of organic truck farms that yield the incredible bounty of the Willamette Valley. A good life — if you bought your home 30 years ago.
As the saying goes, beautiful places attract strange people. Beneath all this beauty are turbulent left-wing politics and festering if somewhat obscure and boutique-ish social grievances. The nation saw this on display over the summer as chronic protests against local police flared into
increasingly violent riots
after the tragic death of George Floyd, leading to intervention by federal Homeland Security officers.
For Portland, it’s just another first: taking the national stage as a laboratory for a Ministry of the Interior experiment in police state policies and practices. The fever dreams of many in the Trump Administration and Portland’s leftist political culture were greatly satisfied, almost a nightmare come true.
This summer of discontent has been a long time coming and is unlikely to dissipate soon. “Keep Portland Weird” is not just a touchstone of city self-image and pride but a distillation of its blend of humanistic optimism and occasionally violent social justice warriorism, which it shares with other West Coast cities like Vancouver, Seattle, and San Francisco.
These streams converge to fuel the city’s left-wing politics and
truly terrible governance
. The mayor’s office is a revolving door. The last to serve more than a single term in this increasingly ungovernable city was Vera Katz, a former long-time speaker of the Oregon House of Representatives, who retired in 2005.
The city’s painfully naive, free-to-be-you-and-me humanism is what has permitted its inhumane
homelessness problem
to spin out of control. This same, non-judgmental, what-I-
hear
-you-
saying
tolerance also accommodates a sizable, long-standing Rose City Antifa faction that has for years engaged in running battles with the police.
Well before the Floyd protests, homelessness and Antifa-led unrest were rendering commercial and residential life downtown increasingly dirty, chaotic, and dangerous. When Trump sent in DHS security forces the chief effect was to fuse the humanists and the radicals into a single bloc.
What followed was a Kabuki version of sentimental 1960s radicalism on the one hand and equally sentimental, faux-Daleyite skull-cracking on the other. Yes, the young radicals were out in force throwing things, setting fires, breaking windows, spraying graffiti, and chanting their heads off during a pandemic of respiratory illness. Some of the
recorded scenes of intimidation
between protesters and citizens gamely seeking to defend police precincts and other public buildings have been truly harrowing.
On the other side, the feds were playing out a Stephen Miller fantasy by
rounding up protesters in unmarked cars
for “questioning.” The humanists were out in force, too. The
Wall of Moms
and
The Wall of Grandparents
interposed themselves between security forces and protesters.
Naked Athena
gave the federal security officers a thrill by sprawling
au natural
in the middle of the street, and the
Dads with Leaf Blowers
showed up to blow the tear-gas back at the security forces.
It all had a hippy-dippy,
Saturday Market
feel to it, minus the homemade jewelry plus rubber bullets. The net result, though, was that the humanist faction was converted into a shield for Antifa. And it worked. With no visible support from local residents and the opposition of the governor and mayor,
the feds pulled back
. They went to Portland, it turns out, not to protect a federal building but to generate some interesting video footage for Team Trump’s
political advertising
.
Portland remains what it has been for decades: Scandinavia without Scandinavians. It never seems to occur to the humanists that their fondest hopes for government and society require high levels of social trust and good citizenship, something Portlandia’s radicals seem completely incapable of producing. Instead, theirs is a vision of society that combines a rigorous commitment to diversity and self-expression with liberal-progressive ideological conformity, a place where everyone looks different but thinks exactly the same.
Needless to say, this aspiration is incompatible with an actual humanism that honors differences of expression in race, ethnicity, sexuality, and other categories while also honoring differences of viewpoint and opinion. Phony pluralism is easy and dangerous while the real thing is difficult and beautiful — too difficult for Portland and not nearly self-congratulatory enough.
A starting point for real pluralistic humanism, ironically, might be vibrant religious institutions that connect people socially, provide transcendent grounding for social action, the doctrinal guardrails like the
imago Dei
that protect individual freedom and conscience. Unfortunately, Portland has some of the highest rates of religious agnosticism and atheism in the country.
None of the above stops or even slows Portlanders in their passion to create a boundary-less society with an expansive welfare safety net and the taxes, regulations, and intrusive government that go with it. Forget bringing “socialism in one country,” Portland’s trying to bring about anarcho-socialism in one city. And it’s proceeding about as well as one would expect.