PAGE_TITLE: 
	Message Received: The Trades Make for Good Careers | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Monday’s Wall Street Journal covers the post-pandemic surge of interest in the
skilled trades
that has begun filling classrooms in apprenticeship and technical training schools. It appears spending two years at home watching knowledge-economy parents toiling away in front of computer screens has boosted the interest of teens and young adults in charting interesting and often well-paid careers working with their hands as well as their minds.
As the article notes, enrollment in skilled trades programs is up 16 percent since 2018. This type of education runs the gamut from dry-wall hanging, to welding, to oil drilling and many other jobs that have gotten short-shrift over the past few decades as American students piled into four-year bachelor’s degree education. As we noted in a recent
report
, college education still makes sense from an economic standpoint—if a student has the interest, ability, and staying-power to finish the coursework. Too often, students start degrees but don’t finish, leaving them with no credential and a mountain of debt. Training in the trades is much less expensive and often allows students to earn while they learn.
If sustained, this shift towards skilled trades will be a welcome sign of diversification in post-secondary education. At the same time, students and parents need to keep a few caveats in mind. First is the herd effect. The high wages currently available for skilled trades workers has succeeded in drawing more workers into these fields. As supply goes up, wages are likely to stabilize; what looked like an amazing deal financially may turn out to be just a good deal over time. Second, the trades are not easy. As the article points out, they require substantial training and are physically demanding. Carpenters, plumbers, welders and oilfield roughnecks may find their bodies wearing out before they are ready to retire. Looking for opportunities that allow for transition to management or tech-supplemented trades work—as well as provide a cadre of mentors and teachers for future skilled laborers—is important for long-term sustainability.
We were long overdue for a rebalancing of the post-secondary education market toward the trades. This is not an either-or question; we need flexible options that put students and their interests at the center along with a culture that honors both forms of education and work. The jaw-boning about the viability of trades, combined with the pandemic-induced second thoughts about college, seems to be working. If so, America’s economy, and its young people, will be better off for it.