PAGE_TITLE: 
	Using CARES Act Funds for Worker Reemployment | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Recent reporting out of Indiana provides an interesting example of how states can creatively use CARES Act funding to help residents find training and jobs. Through its
InsideTrack
program the state is offering free career coaching to Indiana residents to help them upskill and find new and better jobs. The program is funded by $3 million in CARES Act funding along with $1.2 million in state funds.
InsideTrack
connects jobseekers with career coaches to help students and incumbent workers
identify career aspirations and work opportunities, and help them find the
training they need to fill the gap between their current skills and their
long-term work goals. Rather than trying to fit students into preconceived
notions of what they “should” do, this program puts the power of choice into participant
hands and supports them in finding the training and other resources they need
to succeed.
This is a welcome experiment and similar to one Mason Bishop, John Hawkins, and I suggested in a
report
from last year where we recommended diverting some of the federal emergency unemployment benefits to Personal Reemployment Accounts to help workers upskill. This proposal from the governor’s office is another version of our idea as it adds a coaching component for workers who need help finding their way in a job market that has been reshaped by the pandemic.
A 6-axis robotic arm picks up sorting containers at the Amazon fulfillment center in Baltimore, Maryland, U.S., April 30, 2019. REUTERS/Clodagh Kilcoyne
Worker transition
challenges have been with us for decades as the economy has evolved from one
based on manufacturing to one dominated by information and service-oriented
tasks. AEI recently published a
report
by Rachel Lipson and David Deming on deficiencies in our existing transition
programs. The authors point out how existing programs often fail to provide the
kind of career guidance and support workers need to identify new work when the
old job is taken over by automation or outsourced by trade and foreign competition.
InsideTrack is the kind of program that can help fill that gap.
Skilled career coaching can also meet another key need: supporting the development of noncognitive skills. Research has shown that prolonged exposure to life trauma, like that experienced by many during the pandemic, can impair decision-making skills. The kind of coaching Indiana is making available can be a critical resource in helping some workers who are “frozen” by traumatic experiences get back on track. We discussed this issue and need in a chapter written by Beth Babcock of
EMPath
in our recent volume on noncognitive skills,
Minding our Workforce
.
Indiana is showing how to use CARES Act money in a way that helps to meet critical reemployment needs affecting thousands of their citizens. It’s a welcome example and one that other states and the federal government should look to.