PAGE_TITLE: 
	Unemployment Benefits and the Real Value of Work | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

It started with my mother. She was the first
person I heard express concern about the supplementary COVID-19 unemployment
benefits. As a child of the Depression with a high school diploma and someone
who worked more than full-time into her 80s running her own business, she has
an instinctive distrust of unemployment insurance that looks too generous. The
standard state benefits plus $600 a week from the federal government meets her
“too much” test. My mom understands money and is the most dedicated and tireless
worker I’ve ever known; when she talks about things like this, I listen.
A number of Republicans, and a few
Democrats, have been channeling mom’s concerns in the debates on COVID-19
relief legislation. Their argument is that by paying people more on unemployment
than they were receiving in wages, we will cause people to choose the dole over
work. But are people—and especially American workers—truly
homo economicus
, a conception of the human person as
one who works only for money and will easily substitute welfare for work? If
they are, you wouldn’t notice it by their attitudes and behavior. Americans
like and esteem work. We reflexively and relentlessly punish idleness. Given
the choice, the overwhelming majority of the citizenry will choose work over welfare
every time.
The question arises: if
homo economicus
is an incomplete explanation of
work behaviors, what’s missing from it? Adam Smith, the father of capitalism,
summed it up this way in the first sentence of his most important book, the
Theory of Moral Sentiments
: “However selfish soever
man may be supposed, there are evidently some principles in his nature, which
interest him in the fortune of others, and render their happiness necessary to
him, though he derives nothing from it except the pleasure of seeing it.”
These “principles” in human nature are the
mainspring of social life. We instinctively “truck, barter and exchange” in the
give and take of the marketplace. This drive to work, trade, and acquire
ever-rising levels of prosperity, Smith said, is not about meeting actual
material needs, which can be satisfied at a relatively low level, but an effort
to show our affluence to our peers. Keeping up with and exceeding the Joneses
is an essential part of what drives the capitalist system forward. One study
found that money only buys happiness in work up to
about $75,000 per year
. Once you hit that
threshold, the extra pay buys nicer houses, cars, and vacations, but it doesn’t
add appreciably to your overall life happiness. It is only a small fraction of
humanity that actually prefers Netflix to the stimulation work provides. There
is something else about work that drives us out the door in the morning.
To be sure, we need money. But what free
people in a free economy need more than money, and are often perfectly happy to
sacrifice money for, is meaning; and meaning shows up in some pretty surprising
places. There was a
delightful news report
recently
focusing on a sanitation worker. This man, who spends his days picking up and
disposing of his community’s waste, loves his job. He was poetic in his
excitement, explaining the satisfaction he derives from getting up early in the
morning to make his rounds, keeping an exacting timetable, and knowing the
essential role he plays in his community. He loves the place where he lives,
and, in a way, that place loves him back through his job.
The “invisible” function of work, where the
other half of its real value to us lies, is in how it connects us to other
people—coworkers and customers—who meet our need for mutual esteem and human
warmth. This need is with us from the beginning: Babies deprived of emotional
attention and nurture while having their physical needs met can even
die of loneliness
. The reason the overwhelming
majority of American workers will put aside their unemployment benefits—and are
already, in some places, demanding to go back to work—is that, having lost the
meaning and purpose that work provides, they are bored with sitting at home and
crave human contact. They miss the creative outlet of work and, even more, the
chance to gather for the spontaneous, casual conversations that feed our social
needs.
With an unprecedented national effort, we
have temporarily suppressed our instinct to socialize.
Polls show
the public
to be much more worried about reopening the economy too soon rather than too
late, despite high levels of economic anxiety. For the time being, workers are
acting as
homo salus
(safety
person) rather than
homo
economicus
, taking actions that protect their health and the health
of their families while putting economic goals and worries on the back burner.
We need to bear this in mind in analyzing why most workers might prefer the bonus
to the job at the moment. Is it indolence that’s driving the behavior, or an
interplay between the instincts to care for others and protect ourselves?
Some members of the knowledge and political classes,
analyzing policy solely through the lens of economics, seem to be stuck in the
greed-laziness paradigm. They worry the COVID-19 unemployment bonus creates a bad
“incentive structure.” Those alert to irony will note most of these analysts
are able to socially distance
and
get
a paycheck via telework, which means their policy view boils down to “work as
we say, not as we work.” In this frame of understanding, social distance
becomes yet one more luxury good that divides the middle and upper classes from
those at the lower end of the wage scale.
Of course, there are some who will abuse
public generosity and opt for prolonged joblessness, and there are a
growing number of employers
complaining
about having to compete with unemployment benefits that pay above market rate.
These concerns are part of our instinctive preferences for work and against
dependency, a vestigial remnant of the successful campaign to apply time limits
to cash welfare benefits and encourage work among the poor. That policy frame
just doesn’t work very well right now. The
goal of expanded benefits
is
a public health strategy designed to encourage Americans to stay home and help
slow the spread of illness. It is an exceptional policy for an exceptional
time, and it is working as intended.
Normally, we wouldn’t consider anything like
the generosity currently being extended to lower-wage workers. A comparatively
parsimonious public welfare policy is one of the requirements of an economically
dynamic society that fosters work and constrains indolence. In a public health
emergency, however, when the stakes include the possibility of viral illness
and death, appeals to the principles of the rigors of the free market and
charges of renewed welfarism take on a hollow and menacing ring. For those at
the bottom of the socio-economic ladder, the efforts of elected officials—the
same ones who only reluctantly assemble for legislative business—to reduce
COVID-19 unemployment bonuses could easily be taken for a modern aristocracy
defending its privileges. The economic lockdown and its attendant policies are
not sustainable for long, but neither is a system in which policy is built
around the understandings and interests of those whose lives are largely insulated
from that which they advocate. It is rather like favoring a military draft—but
only for other people’s children.
Rather than falling back on prior,
homo-economicus
assumptions, I’d like to propose
we look at the expanded, temporary federal unemployment benefits as an
investment in social solidarity. In the past six weeks, we have grown
accustomed to more generous tipping and words of thanks when it comes to
restaurant workers, grocery store employees, and other essential employees.
These COVID bonuses are a tangible way of saying, especially to those at or
near the bottom of the economic ladder, “We value you. Our destinies are bound
up in one another. We want to protect
and
support
you.” Free markets are central to classical liberalism but so is love of
neighbor.
Finally, it’s important to keep the scale in
mind here. The expanded unemployment benefits are estimated to cost $260
billion over four months, which, to be sure,
Everett Dirksen
would
recognize as “real money.” It is, however, just four percent of the over $6
trillion that Congress has (thus far) appropriated and the Federal Reserve has
injected via monetary policy to stabilize other sectors including business and
finance. Based on the history of the 2008 financial crisis and some of the
emerging stories about business
abuses of CARES Act spending
, we might want to pay more attention to
the moral hazards that crop up around those mountains of dollars than the
prospect of millions of low-wage workers reaping a temporary windfall from the
short-term boost to unemployment benefits.
I think Adam Smith would tell us that social
distancing, no matter how necessary in the short term, cannot and will not
last. (It is ironic that even social distancing can be understood as an aspect
of Smithian mutuality as we seek the happiness of others by staying away from
them.) In an uneven, start-and-stop fashion, the social nature and needs of
human beings will draw us back to work not just because we have to but because
we will be aching to. Taxpayers will demand that those who violate mutuality by
abusing unemployment benefits be tracked down and made to resume
self-sufficient lives; defending these payments in light of chronic
trillion-dollar deficits will be an indefensible burden on future generations
saddled with the debt we are accumulating now. At the same time, society will
have to begin to grapple with our now-dawning realization that essential
workers are essential all the time, not just during disasters. Human
extroversion and mutuality, the indelible core of social and economic life, has
been artificially suppressed and will surely reassert itself. We will meet
again—around the water cooler.