PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Globotics Upheaval: A Book Event with Richard Baldwin | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Event Summary
On Tuesday evening, AEI Resident Fellow Brent Orrell hosted Graduate Institute Geneva Professor Richard Baldwin to discuss Dr. Baldwin’s new book, “The Globotics Upheaval: Globalization, Robotics, and the Future of Work” (Oxford University Press, 2019). Mr. Orrell introduced Dr. Baldwin, who presented his findings on the potential impact of artificial intelligence and automation on white-collar and service-sector jobs in the coming years. He noted that while no one can perfectly predict the future, the jobs of the future may well be jobs that do not currently exist. The best way for workers to prepare, he argued, is to develop uniquely “human” skills that can act as complements to automation rather than being substituted by it.
After his remarks, Dr. Baldwin was joined by Harry Holzer of Georgetown University, Michael Strain of AEI, and Mr. Orrell for a discussion on how many jobs are susceptible to automation and what policymakers can do to prepare workers for the coming changes. The event ended with Q&A, where audience members asked for practical examples of how other countries have handled displacement and what policy levers are available to help soften the blow on effected industries and regions.
— Abbey Jaroma
Description
In “The Globotics Upheaval: Globalization, Robotics, and the Future of Work” (Oxford University Press, 2019), Richard Baldwin argues that rapid technological innovation and globalization will render an ever increasing amount of the labor force unemployed, and the speed of the change will be faster than people’s ability to adapt. Moreover, advancements in communication technology and the proliferation of broadband internet is likely to increase pressure on service-sector professionals (e.g., the legal, accounting, and digital design professions) as these new technologies allow workers across the globe to compete for work.
Join AEI and a panel of experts for a discussion on how technology and automation might affect the future of workforce opportunities and how current workers might prepare themselves for evolving skill requirements.
Join the conversation on social media with @AEI on Twitter and Facebook.
VIDEO