PAGE_TITLE: 
	Howard Husock on The Poor Side of Town, and Why We Need It | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Housing policy in America is inextricably linked with employment opportunities, small business ventures, education access, and a host of other issues that directly impact economic opportunity. Understanding the history of low income housing in America is key to understanding and reimagining housing policy today. On this episode of
Hardly Working
, I am joined by Howard Husock to discuss his new book,
The Poor Side of Town and Why We Need It
. The book lays out a history of American housing policy and a thesis on how low-income housing that allows for private ownership can serve as a gateway to upward mobility, rather than the concentrated and intergenerational poverty that characterizes low-income housing today.
Husock is a senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute where he focuses on urban housing policy, civil society, and municipal government. He has held positions at the Manhattan Institute, the Harvard Kennedy School, and has worked as Emmy-winning documentary filmmaker. We discuss the history of low income residencies in America, the loss of social capital in low income neighborhoods, how much of this is due to public policy interventions, and solutions to rethink housing policy. You can find Howard’s book on the AEI website. I hope you enjoy the conversation.
Mentioned During the Show
The Poor Side of Town and Why We Need It
Princeton School of Public and International Affairs
Edward Banfield: The Unheavenly City
Jacob Riis: How the Other Half Lives
Market Failure
Catherine Bauser: Modern Housing
Brookline, Mass. Town Meeting
Zoning
Portland Urban Growth Boundary
Jane Jacobs Bio
Jane Jacobs: Death and Life of American Cities
Jane Jacobs: The Economy of Cities
Jane Jacobs: Cities and the Wealth of Nations
Robert Moses (housing projects)
Mutual aid definition
Detroit Urban League
Howard’s Senate Banking Committee Testimony
Raj Chetty Moving to Opportunity Study
Jeff Liebman Moving to Opportunity Study