PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Future of Remote Work: Balancing the Trade-offs | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Event Summary
On December 17, AEI’s Brent Orrell and Matthew Leger hosted a presentation and panel discussion on how the future of remote work is unfolding in real time.
Laurel Farrer of Distribute Consulting argued that what we are living through is not “remote work.” Instead, we are dealing with a workplace contingency plan in response to a pandemic.
Nicol Turner Lee of the Brookings Institution recognized the disparities in people’s access to remote opportunities. She also warned there may be unintended health consequences that stem from large-scale remote work. On the flip side, she stated that remote work can benefit workers by improving their quality of life.
Christos A. Makridis of Arizona State University argued that organizations that find the right balance between in-office and remote work will benefit the most when scaling their programs. What makes the difference is evaluating workflows to understand what type of work is best suited for the office and what can be done more efficiently at home.
The panelists agreed that, when employers and employees have the time and opportunity to shape their remote-work programs with intentionality and planning, we will see a more sustainable remote-work future.
— Matthew Leger
Event Description
In the face of COVID-19, companies and their employees had to rapidly shift to remote work. Many firms are not returning, even partially, to the offices they once occupied. This is a massive economic, labor, and social experiment occurring in real time, and some of the trade-offs, positive and negative, are already visible.
COVID-19 has provided a unique opportunity to experiment with remote work at scale and across multiple sectors, industries, and businesses. While largely successful for many firms and workers, there are challenges and adjustments. Now, employers are asking themselves how they can normalize and monitor remote work for the future.
This event brings together industry experts, academics, and practitioners to discuss how the future of remote work is evolving.
Event Materials
Event Transcript
Brent Orrell and Matthew Leger: The trade-offs of remote work: Building a more resilient workplace for the post-COVID-19 world
VIDEO