PAGE_TITLE: 
	The New Consensus on Worker Safety | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

As the weeks
of quarantining have stretched into months, the slow rumblings of reopening the
economy have recently turned into a roar. More than
half the states
have
begun taking steps to reopen, or have plans to begin the process soon, meaning
millions of people are likely to return to work soon. As the spread of COVID-19
has stabilized, employee anxiety about the return to work has
spiked
.
Many are able to avoid their workplaces entirely
via telecommuting. As I’ve
written
elsewhere
, the benefits of working from home are growing
increasingly obvious as companies find it simultaneously protects employee
health, improves productivity, and potentially reduces overhead costs. COVID-19
may be accelerating a workforce diffusion that was already underway before the
pandemic.
In retail, manufacturing, hospitality and other sectors, telecommuting is a
non-starter forcing employers to consider how to improve on-the-job hygiene and
safety. The starting point for these moves is the 1970 Occupational Safety and
Health Act requiring employers to provide a reasonably safe work environment
that mitigates (not eliminates) all known risks. Over the past few months,
unions, public health organizations, and government agencies have released both
guidelines and, in the case of governments, mandates to improve and maximize
protections for workers. Looking across these proposed policies, we are
arriving at a rough consensus on the basic steps that should be taken.
First, since social distancing and good
respiratory hygiene seem to be the best way to reduce spread of the virus,
employers are being encouraged to reduce exposure through reconfigured
workspaces, regular “deep cleaning”, and increased monitoring of employee
health. Expanded use of on-the-job personal protective equipment like masks,
gloves, and ongoing use of hand sanitizers are also part of the basic work
health toolkit.  As we’ve heard endlessly in the past few months, hand
washing remains a top mitigation strategy. Employees will also have to step up
by regularly cleaning and disinfecting their own workstations, computer
keyboards, and telephones.
So, what happens if an employee develops
symptoms while at work? OSHA
recommends
that the
individual be placed in a designated isolation room immediately while they
await medical attention or transport. This room should have doors that close
completely and are located away from high-traffic areas. Employers may also want
to consider making these spaces into
“negative
pressure”
rooms to prevent the escape of germs into the general
office environment. In some instances, employers may also wish to establish
regular in-house testing of employees to detect the asymptomatic COVID-19
cases. Prior to the pandemic such a measure would have been forbidden by
employee protections put in place through the American Disabilities Act (ADA)
unless it was deemed necessary for specific job requirements, but the U.S.
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission recently made an
exception
for
the current circumstances.
Changes to
engineering
controls
within office buildings that help remove germs and
increase fresh air flow are likely to become staples of building management. Office
windows should be opened regularly where possible.
There is
much that we do not yet understand about how COVID-19 transmits and the types
of workspaces that are the most vulnerable to spread. Locations where large
numbers of people are gathered in close quarters like
prisons
,
nursing homes
,
and
meat packing
plants
are notable “point sources” for spread within these
institutions and in the communities that surround them. The most important and
closely monitored office complex in the world, the
White House
,
is now struggling to contain the spread of COVID-19 among those who work there.
No place, it appears, is immune to the challenge.
We haven’t
beaten COVID-19 or even fought it to a draw; we’ve simply arrived at a plateau
with the virus continuing to spread at a high rate. The best that can be said
is that extraordinary social distancing has prevented a catastrophic collapse
of our health care system — no mean feat and worth the price. But we are a
gregarious species that can tolerate such restrictions for only short periods.
We’re going to have to learn to live with COVID-19 at least until an effective
vaccine is available and that means paying
close attention
to
public environments and especially our workplaces.