PAGE_TITLE: 
	Leveling the STEM Playing Field for Low-income Students | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

For decades, policymakers have focused on STEM skill training as a pathway into the middle class, pointing to significant earnings premiums and a growing job market in that sector. As we have
recently pointed out
, however, the STEM earnings premium is relatively short-lived, while long-term success may depend more on the development of a holistic set of “hard” and
“soft” skills
(i.e., non-cognitive or socio-emotional skills) that are crucial to workforce perseverance and adaptability.
Via Twenty20.
In a
new report
, researchers at the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) point out that low-income high school students often perform worse and fail high school STEM classes at a higher rate than their wealthier counterparts. The researchers hypothesized that some of this disparity could be explained by the greater levels of test anxiety that low-income students encounter in the “high-stakes” exams administered in these courses, so offering students emotional regulation training might improve their outcomes and narrow the achievement gap. The researchers employed a simple exercise designed to build emotional capacity in students that would act as a buffer against the negative effects of anxiety, and the results were remarkable. Low-income students who participated in the exercise failed STEM courses at nearly
half
the rate of similar students who did not (18 percent vs. 39 percent). In addition, administering the intervention narrowed differences in test scores between lower- and higher-income students by 29 percent.
These are impressive results that deserve attention and efforts at replication. They also raise the issue of why low-income children suffer from test anxiety and other non-cognitive deficits in the first place — and what can be done about it. As our colleague Katharine Stevens
points out
, the foundation of social-emotional strength is laid early — very early. If we want to be on the prevention side of this issue, we need to focus our attention on family formation, parenting, and early care rather than waiting until later in adolescence. It’s the difference between wet cement and dry: one yields to the touch, while the other requires a hammer and chisel.
“For many students,” the NAS researchers
note
, “success is based on more than STEM knowledge — their ability to regulate emotions is important too.” If we are going to make a real dent in poverty through workforce development, we will have to take this truth to heart.