PAGE_TITLE: 
	Artificial Intelligence: ‘Thousands of Paper-cuts,’ Not the Terminator | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

In her new book,
The Big Nine: How the Tech Titans & Their Thinking Machines Could Warp Humanity
, Amy Webb, futurist and professor at the NYU Stern School of Business, argues that the lack of diversity in the tech sector workforce is a threat to long-term human well-being. While she centers her concerns around racial, ethnic, and gender diversity (the white male homogeneity of the tech sector routinely leads to both amusing and disturbing mistakes), she argues that the relative absence of humanities education among computer programmers is also a significant problem.
The tech “tribe” Webb describes is rigorously and exclusively focused on training students in technical skills and has resisted efforts to broaden technology education to include study of philosophy and ethics. In part, this resistance is a reflection of the rigors of computer science education; there aren’t enough hours in a four-year education to cover the essential scientific knowledge and basic liberal arts education. It’s also true, however, that the “move fast and break things” ethos of the tech sector is often blind, in a clueless sort of way, to ethical considerations. Frequent stories of misuse of personal data by the big data companies is a regular reminder of the dangers of speed. Webb says that as machine learning takes off and AI develops more power to modify and expand itself without human direction, the worldview and values built into early versions of algorithms will be replicated in later, more advanced versions. Once those biases are embedded in systems and spread to other programs, they will be difficult or impossible to get out. Webb does not predict a Terminator-like future but one in which people become inured to technology “paper cuts” –– unwanted intrusions into personal choice like AmazonHealth blocking your AmazonFresh order for microwave popcorn because you’ve had too much already –– that slowly subordinate human freedom to technological nanny-systems.
Seen this way, the development of AI and machine learning begins to look like genetics. Mutations may be helpful or harmful but regardless, they will impact the entire tech genotype and be perpetuated and extended in later generations in unpredictable ways. The values they embody –– mainly utilitarian ones –– need to be consciously scrutinized to avoid and mitigate future challenges. The perspectives of the non-white, non-male world are underrepresented in the tech workforce but so are the philosophical and ethical guardrails that might help protect human freedom in an automated technological future. Encouraging more liberal arts education within tech training programs can help build the field’s capacity to ask the “Should we?” questions alongside the “Can we?” that dominates tech workforce thinking.