PAGE_TITLE: 
	The COVID Culture War Is Killing Us | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Judging by
the proliferation of videos showing angry confrontations over the use of masks
in public, it appears our ongoing culture wars are making a serious dent in
sound public health policy and may delay or even derail our effort to restart
the economy. The twin problems of public health and economic life require a
calmer consideration of the benefits of masking as an easy yet effective
contribution to reducing and containing the spread of COVID-19.
It’s important to remember it was the virus, not
the government, that shut down American commerce, and it is fear of the virus
that is largely keeping it closed. OpenTable, a leading restaurant reservation
website, recently released data showing that the vast majority of the 73
percent decline in reservations took place several days
before the stay at home orders were
issued
. In other words, it wasn’t stay-at-home orders but a
voluntary, precipitous withdrawal from work (supply) and consumption (demand)
that sent the economy into a tailspin. Government efforts at reopening have
only modestly shifted public sentiment. According to the same OpenTable data,
Georgia, which allowed restaurants to reopen in late April, still has 86
percent fewer restaurant reservations on May 19 compared to this time last
year. Texas, Florida, and Oklahoma came in at 77, 77, and 76 percent,
respectively.
As of May 14
,
over 20 percent of restaurants in most early openers still chose to remain
closed. The condition of the restaurant trade appears to track what’s happening
in other sectors in early-opening states with
data showing
only
slowly rising rates of economic activity.
The public was and remains afraid that COVID-19 might cause illness or death to
them and their families. People have voted with their feet and taken their
labor and taken their pocketbooks with them. If we want our producers and
consumers back, we need effective disease mitigation more than economic
stimulus (although we need a lot of that too). Short of a vaccine, which may be
a year or even two away from widespread availability, one of our best options
for reducing the spread of the virus is the use of masks.
In a recent study, Dr. Dekai Wu of UC Berkeley
and other scholars presented a powerful case for the widespread use of masks to
control the infection. Wu’s model
showed
that if 80 percent of the
population adopted masks before day 50 of an outbreak, spread of the disease
could be reduced by 80 percent. Lesser levels or later starts to masking
significantly reduce the beneficial effect. (For a video showing how the model
works, check
here
).
The model also finds high levels of masking are more effective than lockdown
measures in reducing spread. The end of lockdowns on May 31 without widespread
use of masks, the study says, would lead to “unchecked spread” even with social
distancing.
Masks are effective because COVID-19 spreads
through aerosolized droplets that masks directly inhibit. They prevent droplets
from reaching surfaces where the virus can be picked up via the hands and later
transmitted by touching face or eyes. And it doesn’t really matter whether the
mask is designed for a medical setting or comes from a sewing machine at home.
Just about any face covering helps.
Another study by Professor Yuen Kwok-yung of the
University of Hong Kong and his team further illustrates how masks work to
reduce infections. The team had two groups of hamsters in cages, one healthy
and one sick with coronavirus. They ran one test with no masks between the two
cages, one test with a mask fastened near the healthy hamsters, and one test
with a mask near the sick hamsters. In the first group, two-thirds of the
healthy animals were infected after seven days. When the healthy hamsters were
masked the ratio flipped and two-thirds of the healthy subjects avoided
infection. When the sick hamsters were masked, 87 percent of the healthy
hamsters avoided infection. This last group reinforces the most important
reason for wearing masks: they don’t completely prevent healthy subjects from
contracting the disease, but they do significantly prevent sick ones from
spreading it. Wearing a mask isn’t a sign of
personal
cowardice
but of respect and concern for others.
Together, these studies make one thing very
clear about the economic restart: widespread masking is not just a good idea
but an essential one. Slowing disease transmission is the “starter” for
improving public health and reducing anxiety about a return to commercial life.
And it wouldn’t be the
first time
Americans
had taken a step like this during an epidemic. It is nothing short of amazing
that such a simple and effective step has succeeded in
generating
widespread
controversy
and
conflict
in
American society. It is arguable that the culture war, a nuisance for some and
source of entertainment for others, is now literally killing us.
If the Wu
model is correct, the time we have to lower our social media fists and get
serious about masking is drawing quickly to a close. Whether your primary
concern is the health of your community or you are focused on the need to get
the U.S. economy up and running as quickly as possible, promoting the use of
masks is an important step we can all take together.