PAGE_TITLE: 
	Three Perspectives on the Future of AI | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Is AI the end of the world, a new beginning, or just another chapter in the history of humans and their machines? In a thought-provoking
trialogue
, three leading experts, Daron Acemoglu, Adam Thierer, and Erik Brynjolfsson weigh in on these questions, exploring the evolving landscape of work, technology, and economic prosperity in today’s economy.
While it sounds like the setup for a joke, the papers could be summarized as “a pessimist, an optimist, and a realist walk into a bar to talk AI.” Acemoglu plays the role of the concerned pessimist. Consistent with this recent book,
Power and Progress: Our Thousand-Year Struggle Over Technology and Prosperity
, Acemoglu provides a nuanced analysis of automation and AI’s potential impacts on employment and economic equality. Contra those who see it as the dawning of a new economic utopia, Acemoglu says that history gives us no reason to assume AI will substantially increase productivity or generate new or better jobs. In fact, Acemoglu says, history shows us the opposite: technology–at least in the short-run–tends to exacerbate inequality and concentrate benefits in the hands of the few at the expense of the many. The introduction of AI into economic production has to be carefully managed to ensure equitable economic outcomes.
Speaking for the techno-optimists, Adam Thierer’s essay, “We Can’t Predict the Future of Work,” serves as a cautionary tale against speculative–and often alarmist–narratives that predict mass technology-induced unemployment. Thierer challenges the accuracy of such forecasts, using historical evidence to demonstrate the resilience and flexibility of the labor market in the face of technological change. He also highlights the important role automation has played in improving the efficiency and productivity of human work and raising living standards. His argument is a plea for a flexible and dynamic approach to assimilating AI that aims to boost human capital and support worker adaptation.
Treading the
via media
is Stanford economist Erik Brynjolfsson. In his paper, “Beyond the Turing Test,” Brynjolfsson highlights how the effort to create “general” artificial intelligence that can pass the Turing test–machine intelligence indistinguishable from that exercised by humans–is an economic red herring. By chasing this glittering abstraction, AI designers risk warping the entire enterprise and depriving firms and workers of AI-infused tools and processes that could boost long-term economic productivity.
Instead, Brynjolfsson says, designers should be focusing AI on more achievable and worthwhile goals that
augment
human abilities. By treating AI as a new tool rather than seeking to develop a new order of intelligence, designers would help boost human productivity, the key to raising living standards. Give the computers the tedious stuff, while human beings reap the benefits of better and more interesting work. This, Brynjolfsson says, is the path towards the type of progress that can enrich us all.
It’s a truism that opponents are often friends in disguise. As they prod and poke, they help us improve our own thinking and force us to deal with our weaknesses. The insights from Acemoglu, Thierer, and Brynjolfsson, while sometimes in sharp distinction to one another, can help policymakers make informed choices balancing AI development and risks. AI is already in the process of rewriting our economic future, and these perspectives can help us prepare for it.