PAGE_TITLE: 
	Sustaining a National Treasure: Veteran Transitions and the Life Cycle of the All-Volunteer Force | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Key Points
Junior enlisted veterans face the steepest post-service challenges, including high unemployment, poor economic outcomes, and low utilization of existing employment services. Despite a vast support network, many programs are not producing measurable results for this vulnerable group.
Research shows that the two-year period post-transition is the most impactful for intervention. Programs must provide customized and timely support to improve employment and well-being outcomes.
The veteran support system is fragmented and lacks data transparency. Despite billions in federal and nonprofit spending, there remains insufficient outcome measurement, coordination, and data sharing—leading to inefficiencies, redundancy, and poor targeting of services.
Positive veteran outcomes influence recruitment and national security readiness. Reforms such as mandatory Transition Assistance Program completion, Veterans Affairs registration, improved data collection, and investing in effective state-level integrators are essential.
Misconceptions about service risks and post-military struggles dampen enlistment. A coordinated public campaign is needed to reframe military service as a valuable and thriving pathway to civilian success.
Introduction
Since 1973, our all-volunteer force (AVF) has been asked many times to protect the nation’s interests and maintain global peace. To those ends, the AVF has acquitted itself well, and the men and women who have served in the AVF can be proud of each chapter it has written.
For the post-9/11 generation, the most recent of the all-volunteer service members, the past 20 years have witnessed historically high demands on the AVF, especially for deployment—on active-duty forces and, less typically, reserve and guard forces. During the course of the Iraq and Afghanistan conflicts, approximately three million service members deployed across the globe.
1
Even after the 2021 withdrawal from Afghanistan, the strain on our forces and their families endures as the operational tempo remains high.
2
The future propensity of our young people to serve in an all-volunteer military is based on numerous factors, including national need, the state of the civilian job market, and the familial legacy of military service. Real-life examples of transitions out of service, as seen in brothers and sisters, cousins and classmates, and friends and neighbors, significantly affect whether prospective enlistees see the military as a valuable stepping stone to a better life. Accordingly, this report is a high-level assessment of the veteran community, its support landscape, and a series of recommendations to better align funding and outcomes for the most at-risk young veterans—especially junior enlisted veterans.
Every year, approximately 200,000 transitioning service members have access to some 45,000 registered nonprofit veterans service organizations, hundreds of Department of Defense (DOD) SkillBridge apprenticeship and immersive career programs, countless corporate hiring initiatives, and benefits such as the Post-9/11 GI Bill. In addition, one year before their transition date, military personnel complete initial counseling and pre-separation counseling, beginning what is then referred to as the Transition Assistance Program (TAP).
However, this abundance of resources has not driven meaningful impacts for all veterans, especially those with unique and increased post-transition needs. In 2020, a Center for a New American Security white paper titled
Veteran Pathways to Employment: Hurdles and Opportunities
noted that there had been two important federal and private-sector efforts to address the challenges of veteran unemployment.
3
First, the Joining Forces initiative to mobilize public- and private-sector efforts to serve and support the veteran community has helped catalyze major corporate efforts around veteran employment and a reform of TAP to update and improve support to transitioning service members.
These efforts coincided with the second important effort: increased philanthropic attention and commitments to address the needs of veterans.
4
Thanks to these initiatives and an improved economy, veteran unemployment has decreased significantly in the intervening years. However, not all veterans are benefiting, especially those most at risk for post-service challenges. The issue is not a lack of programs or resources. The problem is that the programs aren’t having their intended effects.
According to Pennsylvania State University’s Veterans Metrics Initiative, more than 60 percent of veterans nationwide are either unemployed or underemployed, often because their experiences and skills are not properly understood and recognized by employers.
5
Conflating unemployment and underemployment is problematic, as they are very different problems requiring different solutions. To that end, although today’s overall post-9/11 veteran unemployment rate is lower than that of the general US population, a closer examination of the data shows many signals of poor economic, financial, and other well-being measures converging around the young enlisted veteran population, which experiences the worst transitional outcomes of any veteran subpopulation. Recent data suggest unemployment is substantially higher for the young veteran subpopulation than for nonveteran youth. In June 2024 the unemployment rate was higher for veterans age 18–24 (12.3 percent) than for their nonveteran peers in the same age group (9.3 percent).
6
Key Findings
The fundamental gaps in military transition resources and systems, make the current economic state of this subpopulation concerning. To address the critical needs of junior enlisted veterans, the right interventions need to be deployed at the right time.
Young Veterans’ Needs Are Unmet by Current Models.
Despite being most in need, young veterans do not use employment services at the same rates as other veteran populations. Exacerbating the problem, TAP and other mandated programs have not demonstrated a willingness to disaggregate data, identify those for whom the program is not working, and implement evidence-based frameworks and practices to address these gaps.
7
For example, while research illustrates basic transition activities such as coached resume writing and interview practice produce the best job outcomes, many of these fundamental program components have a limited presence during TAP. Tailoring how these programs are designed, positioned, and marketed to this population could help unlock success.
The Most Effective Point of Intervention Is When a Veteran Is Actively Transitioning.
Research shows impact is maximized when veterans leverage support resources within two years of transition. Effective interventions at the right time can serve as springboards for beneficiaries. Better timing of interventions such as mentoring, interview preparation, and resume building can help veterans secure employment more quickly and reduce employment gaps that affect long-term employability.
8
Effective Interventions for Junior Enlisted Personnel Must Combine Training and Education with Employment.
Driving easy access to career resources upstream is crucial to employing effective engagement and messaging tactics that would best resonate with young veterans. While a large portion of young veterans pursue education and are more likely to complete their education if they use employment transition services, marketing and placement of these services at universities and community colleges—in addition to on military installations during TAP—would improve results.
9
The AVF at 50: Challenges and Opportunities
As we celebrate the 50th anniversary of our AVF, we are concurrently faced with the most significant recruiting crisis since its inception. Recent reporting indicates that all the services will either meet or come close to their recruiting goals for this fiscal year, which indicates some initial success with new programs like the US Army Future Soldier Preparatory Course.
10
This cannot change the reality that less than a quarter of age-eligible young adults meet the qualifications to serve. As with other sectors of our society and economy, slowing population growth means the age-eligible population is declining. As Army Secretary Christine Wormuth noted, “The headwinds that we’ve been facing are not going to stop blowing.” Wormuth said that an expected drop of about 10 percent in the number of college-age young people in 2026 is a significant concern.
11
Even when Americans are eligible and qualified to serve, their willingness to do so appears to be declining. According to the DOD Joint Advertising Market Research & Studies surveys, two main hurdles to service are the risk of injury or death and a fear of developing post-traumatic stress disorder or another emotional or psychological challenge.
12
These concerns are widely shared, and therefore we must take stock and ask hard questions about our nation’s relationship with the AVF. More specifically, we must address the role that transitioning service members, their families, and veterans can play in sustaining the AVF.
To those considering service, veterans are recruitment influencers. It stands to reason that positive transition outcomes would affect one’s willingness to recommend military service. While more research is needed to establish the degree of influence veterans exert on the nation’s recruitment challenges and how to address them, the quality of our transition services is one of the most important policy levers available for promoting military service as a pathway to opportunity in service to the US.
This leads to a key factor affecting the transition experience. For too long, the challenges facing transitioning service members, veterans, and military families have existed under the narrative of the human-interest story at the periphery of domestic policy while also operating as one of our society’s third rails that policymakers are reluctant to touch. As Rebecca Burgess from
The National Interest
said,
A century-worth of this dynamic means that policy analysts and scholars pay little attention to veterans’ policy; that politicians use veterans-related legislation for purposes well beyond improving actual veterans’ lives; and that the public assumes Federal funding is shamefully neglectful of veterans.
13
This results in an overall approach that combines excessive or redundant funding and policy neglect.
Addressing this problem is a strategic necessity. As John W. Copeland and David W. Sutherland’s 2010
Sea of Goodwill
paper stated,
The strength and competence of our all-volunteer force is essential to our national security. Just as speedy recovery is essential to our readiness for future operations, the knowledge that a warrior and his family will be supported and reintegrated into civilian society is essential to morale and maintaining our volunteer force.
14
If service members do not have this assurance, it will be increasingly difficult to persuade prospective recruits that military service is a good career investment. This interrelationship between those who have served and those who will serve in the future is crucial. The populations of veterans and their family members is increasingly regionally concentrated and more of a “family business” every year.
15
This life cycle of the AVF requires further research and analysis alongside robust debate about the sustainability of the systems that support those in service, veterans, and military families.
As the Biden administration’s most recent National Security Strategy stated, “The post–Cold War era is definitively over, and a competition is underway between the major powers to shape what comes next.”
16
Thus, as our national security needs change in this pivotal decade, we must maintain services and resources that are measured, effective, and sustainable over the long term to ensure the nation has the talent it needs to protect its interests around the globe.
The Enduring Issues
These recommendations are built around the long-running challenges of supporting and maintaining the linkages between the AVF and the communities and economies where our volunteers are recruited:
Employment and Career Prospects.
Securing meaningful employment is the cornerstone of successful transition. While programs like TAP help, tailored solutions are needed for populations that often have greater difficulty finding jobs and establishing post-service careers, especially our junior enlisted personnel.
Education Pathways.
Education remains a critical enabler of career advancement. However, disparities in the quality of educational outcomes highlight the need for robust outcome data collection and analysis to maximize the return on investment for GI Bill beneficiaries.
Health and Well-Being.
Addressing physical, mental, and spiritual health is essential. Persistent barriers such as stigma and a hard-to-navigate health services system hinder veterans’ access to care.
These issues exist within a support landscape that is vast but fragmented. Veterans are served by federal agencies, state governments, and a multitude of nonprofits, often with overlapping objectives. Notable challenges include the following:
Data Gaps.
High-quality information on veteran demographics and locations is scarce, hindering efficient resource allocation. Enhanced data sharing among the DOD, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), and other entities is essential.
Outcome Measurement.
Current programs often focus on participation metrics instead of outcome measures. A standardized impact assessment framework is needed to evaluate and compare the effectiveness of support services across providers.
Sustainability.
Rising costs—projected at $370 billion in 2025 for the VA—raise sustainability questions in the context of rising federal budget deficits and growing competition for resources.
17
Determining the number of veterans in our country can be an exercise in assumptions. The two most relied-on sources for this are the Veteran Population Projection Model (VetPop) and the US Census Bureau’s American Community Survey. The VetPop is a deterministic projection model that provides estimates of the veteran population, including specifics like race, gender, and age over a 30-year period.
In fiscal year (FY) 2023, there were approximately 18.3 million veterans, down from 26.6 million in 2000— a decline of 31 percent over the 23-year period. By FY2050, VetPop projects a population of 11.9 million veterans, a decrease of 35 percent from 2023. This represents an average decline of 241,000 per year over the projection period. The population will become slightly younger (falling from an average of 62 to 59 years) and more diverse, with an increased percentage of minority veterans (26 percent to 38 percent) and women (11 percent to 18 percent).
18
These population estimates and projections exist alongside measurements provided by the American Community Survey, which is an ongoing survey instrument designed to position community and business leaders to observe changes taking place in their communities and help shape policy at the federal, state, and local levels. Its annual release includes only locations with a population of 65,000 or more, which excludes 75 percent of the nation’s counties.
19
The 2023 survey reported just over 15.8 million respondents claiming veteran status, a meaningful difference from the VetPop model, given that respondents have to self-select veteran status.
20
Many do not.
Ultimately, this means we are attempting to deliver resources in support of the veteran and military family populations without precise information as to where they live at the zip code level. In a previous series of recommendations at the George W. Bush Institute, one of this report’s authors suggested enhanced data collaboration through the Veterans Affairs/DOD Identity Repository and weekly payroll information from the Social Security Administration to improve our understanding of where veterans are and how they are faring financially.
21
The issue remains unresolved.
The Post-9/11 Cohort
Just before midnight on August 30, 2021, the final US Air Force C-17 departed Kabul Airport, marking an end to America’s longest war. During the Iraq and Afghanistan conflicts, more than five million service members and their families served, with more than three million deploying to Afghanistan, Iraq, and other theaters of conflict.
22
To identify the most recent generation of service members, the VA uses August 2, 1990, as the beginning date for the “Persian Gulf War era,” including all those who served after that date. A more specific grouping falls under the post-9/11 GI Bill eligibility definition identifying a service member who joined after September 10, 2001. A good proxy for identifying the post-9/11 generation is to identify veterans under age 50, which comprises nearly one-third of all veterans.
23
The service experiences of this latter group, as well as its members’ transitions back to civilian life, differ from the generations that preceded them. Within this cohort, higher percentages experienced more frequent and lengthier deployments to combat theaters than did conscript-era forces. Over half of deployments to Iraq or Afghanistan were from the National Guard and Reserves.
24
One cause of this high operational tempo is the decades-long downward trend of the AVF’s size, with the most recent DOD budget overview requesting 1.28 million active-duty service members.
25
Within the smaller force structure, the AVF is more diverse than at any time in its history, with women comprising 16 percent of all personnel in 2017, up from 9 percent in 1980
.
The racial and ethnic breakdown shows that while the majority of personnel remain non-Hispanic white (57 percent), the fastest-growing minority population in the AVF is Hispanic, comprising 36 percent of the force as of 2017.
26
Post-9/11 in Transition
Military-to-civilian transition is a discrete and unique event and a post-service journey. One day a service member is on active duty, and the next day, with their DD-214 federal form in hand, they are a “veteran.” For many veterans, this can be a difficult and disorienting change.
Although many transition easily into their next career or educational pursuit, recent research by the VETERANetwork at Pennsylvania State University indicates that 65 percent of the post-9/11 respondents didn’t feel fully transitioned until three years after service, with an additional 19 percent not feeling fully transitioned at 6.5 years after service. Those who still reported not being fully transitioned more than six years after service noted their main concerns were mental health, employment, and making and keeping friends.
27
Transition as a journey is not monolithic. Each service member has a different story to tell and different needs upon transition: Not only do the different branches of service specialize in different core areas, but each branch divides its needs into thousands of different “military occupational specialties,” which can vary as widely as doctor, musician, gunner, and sniper, to name just a few. The majority of personnel transition successfully without much demand on the transition support landscape. However, for those who have distinct and longer-term needs, a framework to apply resources efficiently is important. The federal government’s policy focus has been to make vets “whole,” without a clear definition of what this actually means.
To improve clarity about what constitutes a successful transition, research done by the Veterans Metrics Initiative has indicated that the following domains are critical to success in transition: employment, education, finances, legal security, social connections, and physical and mental health.
Transition programs today have improved significantly since 2001; however, most miss the mark when it comes to customized and tailored needs of veterans at risk of transition difficulties—who most frequently happen to be our junior enlisted personnel.
28
It is fair to say a well-identified subpopulation of veterans is at risk and requires greater focus and support to boost these veterans’ chances of positive outcomes. Here the US must focus its resources to ensure that military service remains a pathway to opportunity, especially in regard to post-service career and workforce options.
Transition and the Current Veteran Support System: The Splendid Isolation and Charting a Course After the Sea of Goodwill
The landscape supporting transitioning service members, veterans, and military families is vast and complex, resulting in a confusing marketplace of options for those in need. Further, we currently lack the consistent data collection and analysis necessary to assess outcomes, evaluate and manage redundancies, improve program performance, and foster an honest and open conversation about the fiscal sustainability of our transition services. Without such data and analysis, there is a risk of losing the public and congressional support necessary to maintain transition investments.
Further complicating this challenge is the reluctance on the part of politicians, policymakers, and the public to look closely at what and how programs and supports are being delivered and what measured outcomes they produce. Too often, the public—and many veterans, for that matter—believe that the federal government does not spend enough on veterans and therefore that the primary solution is to increase public spending. Burgess further states, “More intriguingly, that same historical record also reveals veterans’ policy to be among the most contentiously political, most resistant to independent analysis, policy field— that is, when outside scrutiny is even allowed.”
29
Any proposed reforms, however cautiously presented, face significant political resistance as “veterans’ groups and the congressional veterans’ affairs committees remain deeply involved in monitoring and altering veterans’ law.”
30
Federal Support Programs
It is commonly assumed that the VA delivers services and benefits to all who have worn the uniform, despite the reality that not all who have served qualify. Across the federal enterprise is a wide array of well-intended and long-standing transition support programs. The Department of Labor, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the Small Business Administration, in addition to many other federal entities, all have specific programs designed to help veterans and their families. The question is whether they all operate in support of common goals for those in need and whether any of these federal agencies measure the efficacy of their veteran-serving programs. The establishment of outcome measures and assessments of program redundancy are urgently needed. A recent RAND Corporation report revealed an array of 45 programs across 11 federal agencies spending a total of $14.3 billion per year. The “Big Four” (Post-9/11 GI Bill, Veteran Readiness and Employment, DOD Tuition Assistance Program, and Survivors’ and Dependents’ Educational Assistance) account for 94 percent of total spending, of which 97 percent is focused on educational assistance.
31
There is disagreement over whether to group all educational assistance programs together and apply common employment outcome measures to them. Educational benefits and resources are not the same as workforce readiness and employment transition resources.
The unavoidable truth is that college and higher education are expensive. Additionally, the quality of education received varies definitionally based on where, what, and how a veteran studies. That contrasts with something like TAP, which should theoretically be uniform no matter where or when a transitioning service member participates in it.
Regardless, with the remaining 5 percent of the $14.3 billion focused generally on workforce readiness, it is clear in the vast array of federal resources devoted to transition that there is limited assessment of redundancy and oversight for defined outcomes. We must ask whether these federal dollars are being invested in the right programs, whether the overall amount is fiscally sustainable, whether these programs are being measured against a defined outcome, and, in general, whether such programs are truly supporting the populations most at risk in transition.
The VA
The past 30 years have witnessed significant growth in funding for veterans, transforming the VA into the second-largest federal agency behind the DOD in terms of budget and personnel. Behind that growth is the enduring resistance to asking tough questions about the effect and outcomes of the department’s benefits and program structure.
The VA budget in 2001 was $45 billion with a veteran population of just over 26 million. The 2025 VA budget request is $370 billion with a veteran population of just under 18 million.
32
Health care demands from an aging population account for some, but not all, of that budget growth. A main contributor to this growth in federal spending on veterans is the VA Disability Compensation (VADC) program, which for 2025 will total $193 billion.
33
Here it is important to state that many veterans and their families benefit from VADC and would be far worse off without it. What remains unclear are the unintended negative consequences of the VADC structure and what can be done to ensure recipients, if able, remain actively engaged in the career market. This is a challenge VADC shares with other federal disability insurance programs, and it is not unique to veterans-serving disability programs.
The past 20-plus years of continuous engagement overseas has seen an upward trend of those applying for and receiving VADC. Until 1999, approximately 8 percent of veterans received VADC, but by 2018, the population had tripled to 24 percent.
34
Much of this is certainly due to the nature of service after 9/11, combat experience, and the duration and frequency of deployments. However, other elements include “legislative action, [VA] policy changes, societal developments, and improved information flow [that] enabled and encouraged many more veterans to file for disability.”
35
A recent Congressional Budget Office report showed lower earnings for those with disability ratings when compared to veterans with no disability ratings. This variance increases as the disability rating goes up. Research has found that veterans who receive VA payments have lower labor force participation rates than they would have otherwise because the current program creates a disincentive to work.
36
It is fair to ask about the unintended consequences of a VADC budget that “now exceeds the annual budgets of the Department of State, the Department of the Interior, the Department of Labor, the Department of Transportation, and the Department of Commerce combined.”
37
Disability compensation is truly well-meaning and benevolent and, for many, is a critical support resource. At the same time, for many veterans, the program creates significant work disincentives that need to be addressed. As Nicholas Eberstadt stated in his September 2022
Wall Street Journal
piece, “Success through work, no matter one’s station, is a key to self-esteem, independence and belonging.”
38
The lack of such success can be its own barrier to thriving and flourishing. We owe it to veterans and ourselves to help them build productive, meaningful post-service lives.
The Nonprofit Landscape and Shifting Philanthropic Winds
Public programs are not the only piece of the veteran transition puzzle. Service members and their families often engage with many services across various sectors. Federal, state, and nonprofit organizations are all positioned to provide support to those in need. The challenge for the veteran in need remains maneuvering and leveraging services in a complex and confusing marketplace. Specific to the veteran-serving nonprofit landscape, a 2015 Center for a New American Security study found more than 40,000 organizations registered with the IRS as “tax-exempt and explicitly focused on the veterans and military community.”
39
These organizations are organizationally and geographically fragmented, with 79 percent composed of auxiliary facilities and locations through the American Legion and Veterans of Foreign Wars. In terms of funding, 69 percent reported revenues of less than $100,000 per year. This combination of large numbers of affiliates and small budgets suggests a highly fragmented local marketplace with limited transparency regarding effectiveness and outcomes.
40
Funding for the vast array of nonprofits appears generally strong, with some notable declines in revenue for the “Big Six” veteran-serving organizations (American Legion, American Veterans, Paralyzed Veterans of America, Vietnam Veterans of America, Disabled American Veterans, and Veterans of Foreign Wars) over the past decade. Support for veterans and military families in transition, as measured by philanthropic and individual giving also appears to remain strong.
However, the research specific to giving in the veteran space is dated. Recent conversations with experts in the space revealed growing headwinds and risk to mission. Dan Goldenberg from the Call of Duty Endowment stated, “although some reports during the pandemic indicated giving was strong, our more recent experience shows growing headwinds in giving to veteran nonprofits, which makes the case for federal funding streams to the highest performing of these organizations even stronger.”
41
There is also a lack of clarity as to what areas of veteran need are under-resourced relative to demand. The ability of public and private funders to make informed choices based on clear data is crucial to maximizing veteran outcomes, further highlighting the need for improving definitions of success and aligning data collection and analysis to those definitions.
The Power of State Governors and High-Performing Integrators
Veterans and their families transition home to communities where the array of federal and nonprofit resources may be lacking and poorly coordinated. As veterans select which area of the country to settle in, they can face licensing and credentialing barriers that inhibit their ability to gain meaningful employment in sectors with critical labor shortages.
One example is the shortage of registered nurses in our health care system nationwide. Projections indicate that 1.2 million new registered nurses are needed by 2030.
42
This shortage also extends to paramedics and other hospital personnel. Approximately 10,000 medically trained personnel transition out of the military every year, and the 50 percent of them who want to continue their career in health care and receive additional training to advance in their profession could help fill this void. However, “bureaucratic red tape, a lack of clear regulations, and poorly communicated standards in most states and territories prevents that progression from happening.”
43
States can play a clear role in reducing licensing barriers and establishing effective partnerships to address economic opportunities for those transitioning from military service. These efforts must coincide with the mandate to measure the effect and outcomes of services provided, as well as reduce confusion for those trying to engage with a multitude of services at the same time.
Two noteworthy examples that address this challenge include the Texas Veterans Network and the Virginia Veterans Network. Launched in 2020, the Texas Veterans Network integrates over 300 vetted veteran-serving organizations via a centralized platform. It is unique in its close partnership with military installations in Texas, which conduct TAPs every year. By doing this, those who transition out in Texas and choose to stay in the state can immediately engage with coordinated and comprehensive support systems. By 2023, all 254 counties in Texas were supported by a common web-based Combined Arms platform, which provides a similar model of delivery via a managed network of vetted partners, serving 50,000 clients in need.
44
New York City, South Carolina, and Virginia also use the Combined Arms system. What makes these models effective is their ability to reduce the confusion in finding effective and vetted services for those in need, maintaining long-term relationships with veterans and their families to establish support for changing needs over time, and ensuring quality in services and delivery among providers. Critical to this success is the Combined Arms platform, which has demonstrated measured success in efficiently coordinating multiple veterans service organizations and state and federal agencies by using accessible and affordable technology to streamline veteran access. These platforms and models are part of a state economic development strategy helping to attract and retain talent in critical workforce sectors.
Recommendations
The AVF has been the central pillar of federal policy in creating the globe’s highest-quality and best-trained military, a force that has been integral in defending the nation’s interests and maintaining the peace. Sustaining that force requires transition programs that help service members build successful post-service lives so they can spread the word among future potential recruits about the benefits of a military career.
Helping veterans connect to education, training, and work is the key to a successful transition. To help ensure that federal dollars are invested in programs and organizations with measurable and documented success, we encourage the public, private, and philanthropic sectors to invest wisely in those who deliver effective services establish rigorous outcome measures, and tailor transition services, to those most in need:
Invest in Those Who Deliver on Career Readiness.
Funding should be directed to programs that effectively improve veteran outcomes, including partnerships with successful nonprofit and private initiatives. In many cases, the best outcomes in helping veterans reintegrate and find meaningful career pathways are achieved through the private and nonprofit sectors. By scrutinizing the outcomes of major public veteran-serving programs, we can gain a better sense of whether and how their performance compares to best-in-class private initiatives like Hire Heroes USA, VetJobs, and the US Chamber of Commerce’s Hiring our Heroes Program. For public and private programs, successful employment outcomes should be the main driver of funding decisions.
Invest in Targeted Transition Support.
The data show that junior enlisted personnel, women, and minorities are most at risk in transition. Leverage the findings widely available from The Veterans Metrics Initiative, specifically the Veteran Transition Screener, to implement the most effective tools for those in need. We know which veterans are at greatest risk of negative employment outcomes; it’s time to deliver what they need
.
45
Invest in High-Quality Integrators at the State Level.
Organizations such as Combined Arms provide a technology-based solution for the unique needs of veterans and their families at the state level. Leverage federal funding to invest in the growth and development of these solutions at the state level. This funding must coincide with robust partnerships through respective governor’s offices, state-based VA directors, the American Legislative Exchange Council, the National Conference of State Legislators, and the National Governors Association. By doing so, the effective delivery of services across a spectrum of need can be supported by integrated policy work to enhance economic mobility.
Implement a “Veteran Impact Dashboard.”
Mandate evidence-based funding and third-party oversight to ensure alignment with measurable goals. Track the effectiveness of the aforementioned investments in support programs for government-delivered and nonprofit and private organizations that receive federal dollars. This is the responsibility of legislators and those in the House and Senate Veterans’ Affairs Committees. Currently, there are no key performance indicators to measure key transition goals. This requires the creation of a standardized set of outcomes and impact measures, directly traceable to the support function and service that has correlation or causation.
Reestablish the Chairman’s Office of Reintegration.
Rather than distributing the responsibility and authority for transition success across multiple government entities, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff needs to fund and lead high-quality reintegrations. This requires the return of DOD leadership to the transition process. In reestablishing the Chairman’s Office of Reintegration, the acknowledgment that transition outcomes are crucial to the sustainment of the AVF is highlighted to all stakeholders.
Make Registration with the VA a Mandatory Transition Step.
The VA stands alone as an important entity to house and manage the information of those who have served. Improved knowledge of the veteran population is crucial and achievable via a change through the National Defense Authorization Act. We must change current service member “opt-out” versus “opt-in” language to enable secure sharing of relevant data with state and federal agencies.
Make TAP Mandatory.
Mandate completion of an improved and customized employment section of TAP before separation. A 2022 Government Accountability Office report stated that “Nearly 25% of servicemembers who needed maximum support didn’t attend a mandatory 2-day class. And most servicemembers didn’t start the program at least 1 year before leaving service, as normally required.”
46
This needs to change for those at risk.
Improve Our Knowledge of Veterans’ Economic Experiences.
Connect the VA/DOD Identity Repository database and information available from the Social Security Administration specific to payroll information at the zip code level. This would enable a better delivery of resources targeted to regions of the country with enduring economic challenges.
47
Win the Narrative.
Misunderstandings about military service and its effects have undoubtedly curtailed the propensity of many to serve. From fear of serious injury and death to mental health issues and negative economic impacts, the time is now to better own the positive narrative associated with military service. It’s time to implement a coordinated campaign led by the DOD to highlight the positive impacts of military service, focusing on educators, businesses, policymakers, and the general public. We must combat stereotypes and reframe veterans as leaders and contributors in civilian society. Instead of romanticizing or pathologizing, we must focus on the truth of the veteran experience, including the fact that so many are thriving in their post-service lives.
Conclusion
The AVF is a national treasure, but its sustainability depends on robust support systems that enable successful transitions and foster positive perceptions of military service. Critical to this effort is a renewed focus and smarter allocation of resources toward career opportunities for the transitioning service members and veterans who are most at risk, as well as improved quality and transparency of services. As the United States navigates an era of intensified global competition, investing in the life cycle of the AVF— recruitment, service, and transition—is not just a moral imperative but a strategic necessity. By aligning resources, policies, and narratives with desired outcomes, we can ensure the AVF remains a cornerstone of national security for generations to come.
About the Authors
Brent Orrell
is a senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute (AEI), specializing in job training and workforce development with a special focus on disconnected and disadvantaged populations, including youth, justice involved, veterans, and neurodivergent persons.
Matthew Amidon
worked for the George W. Bush Institute, where he developed policy and programs for veterans and military families. He is a retired member of the US Marine Corps Reserve.
Acknowledgments
AEI would like to thank the Schultz Family Foundation for its generous support of this work. More on AEI’s organization and purposes can be found at
https://www.aei.org/about/aeis-organizationand-purposes/
.