PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Light Inside - and Out: New Findings on Faith and Re-entry | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

For decades, state and federal governments have been examining the role of religion and faith-based service delivery in reducing criminal recidivism. Much of this work, such as the
Inner Change Freedom Initiative
, was premised on the belief that personal religious transformation buffers against criminal habits and temptations. Researchers at Rutgers and Bowling Green Universities affirm this finding, in part, while arguing that the role of religion in preventing recidivism is more complex than we previously imagined. The faith of prisoners matters, but so does the religious environment in the cities, towns, and neighborhoods — what the authors call “moral communities” — to which prisoners return.
Image via Twenty20
In their new study
, Richard Stansfield and Thomas Mowen tracked outcomes for more than 1,300 released prisoners in Oregon. The researchers wanted to see if the makeup of the community – religious practice, the presence of social service resources, and economic vibrancy – contributes to desistance from criminal behavior.
The researchers found that the strength of a given community’s religious adherence significantly affected recidivism rates. In other words, the greater percentage of people that were a part of a religious congregation in a given community, the less likely a released prisoner in that community was to be reconvicted for a future crime. The economic conditions in a community had a similarly strong effect, with worse economic prospects being associated with significantly higher recidivism rates. Interestingly, while community-based social services had little impact on recidivism, in-prison religion and moral development activities also showed a positive impact.
My colleague, Grant Duwe, recently published a report arguing that “
the company you keep
” (i.e., the social relationships returning citizens adopt) can have a significant impact on recidivism. These new findings provide further evidence that the environment around the returning citizen — including the moral or religious environment — are key drivers of individual success.
In other words, it is not enough for an offender to “see the light” in prison. When it comes to staying out of trouble, the study shows it is more important that returning citizens continue to see the effect of that light in the community around them when they come home. This suggests that in addition to making voluntary religious programming easily accessible behind the walls, more emphasis should be placed on encouraging corrections systems and local probation and parole offices to partner with faith institutions in a serious and meaningful way to create points of community connection for returning citizens. These organizations are plentiful in America, and you can read more about some notable ones
here
,
here
, and
here
.
The other key finding from the study is that recidivism is much easier to combat when communities are flourishing economically. The study found depressed economies diminished the protective effect of religion, positing that the discouragement and disillusionment over the reality of prolonged unemployment is an aggravating factor in re-arrest. Boosting economic opportunity in zip codes with large numbers of returning citizens and fostering community-justice system partnerships, while “layering-in” specific employment and training services, should be seen as necessary complements to sustaining criminal desistance rooted in religious and moral change.
One of the challenges in addressing criminal recidivism is the tendency to search for a single policy that will turn the tide of re-offending. Many have put their faith in religious conversion, or better social services, or employment programs alone as the answer. The truth is, preventing recidivism is a jigsaw, and each person his or her own puzzle. For some, personal faith will help, but it does the most good when citizens return to religiously vibrant and economically strong communities.