PAGE_TITLE: 
	Artificial Intelligence and the Workforce: My Long-Read Q&A with Brent Orrell | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

As artificial intelligence continues to develop, many workers fear the disruptive potential of a fast-changing job market. How will AI impact the economy and how can workers prepare for the future? Today, my AEI colleague Brent Orrell joins
Political Economy
to answer those questions and more.
Brent is a senior fellow here at AEI, where he works on job training and workforce development. He’s also host of the
Hardly Working
podcast.
What follows is a lightly edited transcript of our conversation. You can download the episode
here
, and don’t forget to subscribe to my podcast on
iTunes
or
Stitcher
. Tell your friends, leave a review.
Pethokoukis: Back in 2021, you gave some
congressional testimony
. Let me just read a sentence.
Orell: Oh, no, you’re going to quote me back to myself.
I love doing it, here we go, “In light of an increasingly automated economy, the solution is not to attempt to constrain technological change or alter its course, but rather to build up the capacities of our workforce in both technical and non-cognitive domains while technological change continues to run its course.” Over the past couple months, we’ve had a new technology emerge called generative AI. Maybe people know it as
ChatGPT
or
Bing AI
or
DALL-E
or
Midjourney
in which AI can predict and answer questions, seems to make connections, and create interesting art. I think people are now wondering if we have reached a point where all that stuff, technical and non-cognitive domains improving that—I’ll have you explain that stuff in a minute—whether we might be moving past that, whether AI is about to take off. I sense some concern out there, I guess this is my question. Do you sense concern?
No, I think that technological breakthroughs always generate concern. We’ve been living through these episodes of turbulence in the economy, driven by automation, driven by new technologies, for centuries now. As you’re well aware, Jim, the story that we tell ourselves every time this happens is that work is coming to an end, the robots are going to replace us, there’s not going to be any work. Of course, there’s absolutely no evidence to suggest that that’s the case from the historical record. Machines, whether they are steam engines or transistors have a tendency to expand the reach of human work. I have no reason to think that this chapter is going to be different than any of those other chapters. In fact, I think the primary thing that we need to be worried about right now in terms of the workforce is that we’re not going to have enough people.
As the population ages—
in 1960, the average age in this country was 20, and now it’s 38
—we have fewer new workers coming in line. We’re going to have to figure out how to get more out of our existing human capital. So I just don’t see it [being a problem]. I think even at this early stage with AI, you can already see, at least I can see it in my own work, it is not taking work away, it is adding work. It is adding in more than one sense, not just the quantity, but the capacity to do even more work. I think that’s really the pattern that we’re going to be looking at.
I think whatever the particulars of a new technology, people are susceptible to the, “X technology will take all the jobs” argument. One, because it’s easier to imagine a job being automated than to imagine the productivity benefit helping you with a new task or creating those new jobs. But the part of that sentence I read—where you talk about building up the capacities of our workforce—I think people just aren’t confident that we know how to do that. Yes, we know how to educate high schoolers, we know how to send people to college. But I don’t think there’s a lot of confidence that if you have a job and it has to radically change, or we have to get a new job, that we know how to train those people at all.
This is what it comes down to for me. There are two important skill sets as we move forward, and I think these have been the key skill sets for quite a while now. One is to develop the capacity to be flexible and to learn—that is probably in my view the most important skill moving forward—this capacity to learn and to flex and adapt with new technology. I don’t undersell that. I think that would be more than enough if that’s all that we had to do, was to build a workforce that had the capacity to take on new technology and adapt to it, and remain cognitively flexible in the face of all of this change. I think that’s the most important challenge. I think it’s the biggest challenge, and I’m not saying that that’s an easy thing to do, but that is the most important skill.
The second is related to the first, which is new workers coming into the workforce need to have a very fluid relationship with technology. As they enter the stream of work, they need to make sure that they’ve got, regardless of what their sort of formal training is in. It could be psychology, it could be philosophy, it could be medicine, it doesn’t matter. But what they need is really fluency with technology so that they are comfortable, they understand the underlying operating principles of generative AI and all the other new technologies that are coming online.
If you have those two things, you’re going to be fine. If you enter the workforce with the expectation that the job that you’re doing now, whatever your job is, it’s not going to change, then I think you are really hampering yourself for the future. Your job is going to change. It’s not going to go away, for most people anyway. It’s not going to go away, but it is going to change. Or you’re going to have to learn how to do new stuff and use all of these great new tools. And they are fantastic tools. I’ve had the opportunity to get an early account on the new Bing chat, and I’m telling you, it is such a time saver. It is unbelievable how much it can speed up your work if you’re working in the knowledge economy. That’s a lot of the workforce right there; the people who have those knowledge components to their jobs, this generative AI is going to make things a lot faster and a lot easier.
Getting back to what people need to do to survive and thrive. The technical part, people can understand like, “I might have to take a class. I’ll have to look. I certainly have to be open-minded.” But the non-cognitive skills, which you write a lot about, why will those be important? I almost think they’ll be less important because you’re dealing with technology. Why would [non-cognitive skills] be so important in this new more technologically driven environment?
Yes, it’s a paradox that you’ve put your finger on. As technology increases its presence and takes over more of the repetitive, mundane tasks of work, the premium shifts up on these non-cognitive skills, which are—just to simplify this—we’ll just talk about them in terms of interpersonal skills. There are some things that AI can do very, very well, and that domain actually is going to grow over time. Anytime anybody says to you, “AI can’t do X,” fill in the blank, you always need to put a footnote there and say, yet, the technology will continue to surprise us in terms of its capacity. But at the moment, and this has really been true since the ‘80s, the premium on these non-cognitive skills has been going up. And if you ask employers what’s missing in the workforce is things like communication, teamwork, management, and critical thinking—a lot of it is in this domain of how people relate to one another.
Those kinds of skills are as much in demand as the technical skills that we spend most of our time and effort trying to train people for. And technical skills are those skills, which are, “I know that when I pick up a screwdriver, I turn it right to tighten and left to loosen.” That’s a very simplified version of this. Those things can be broken down into curricula and trained in a classroom. Non-cognitive skills are much more like the things that we absorb out of the social environment as we move around doing the stuff that we need to do in life. It starts when we’re very young in infancy and it develops very slowly and very gradually. What that tells us is that if we’re interested in increasing the supply of non-cognitive skills, we really need to focus on early childhood, childhood and adolescence to help people get those skills.
Now, what does that mean? Well, family formation is extremely important in this. We’ve got a problem in our society with too many kids being raised in single-parent families. I’m not here to trash or get down on single-parent families. I love them, I think they are heroic in many ways because I’ve got three kids, and I know I couldn’t have done that by myself in raising them. That’s not what I’m saying. It’s just that all things being equal, kids in two-parent families do better than kids in one-parent families. One of the ways that they do better is in the development of this non-cognitive skill base. So if I could wave a wand over one social problem, that’s it. That would probably take care of a very good size of the challenge that we’re facing on the workforce side.
If you have 20-year-olds entering the workforce who don’t have those skills, is it too late? Have they missed their opportunity?
No, I think human beings are amazingly flexible in their ability to learn even those kinds of skills. What I’m hearing—from both people in universities and people dealing with HR questions with younger workers right now—is that even kids that have a lot of those early advantages are struggling right now and new workers because of the pandemic. There have been short-term hits to the capacity of younger workers that have to be worked on. A lot of explaining needs to be done about appropriate workplace behaviors. We also have really great programs for disadvantaged populations called
sectoral-based training programs
, which really try to combine technical skill training with non-cognitive skill training. Honestly, we just finished a review of all the evidence around many of the workforce programs that we have in this country and these sectoral programs are the only ones that we can point to that really yield large sustained gains in income for people. In my view, it’s because they are addressing the entire person rather than treating people as if, “I just give them a technical skill, they’ll be fine.” So, those skills can be learned, we have programs and educational approaches that can help to teach them. It’s not a career death sentence. If you’ve got that kind of a deficit, you need to be attentive to it. Everybody needs to be attentive to their own development on this and really find ways to increase their capacity.
Do we have a worker retraining system in this country that works as it should? If we don’t, do we know how to create one?
We don’t know how to create it. We have some glimmers of pieces of ideas that seem to be very helpful. The sectoral training strategies are one of those. I think we need to be doing a lot better at every level on career guidance and development because it’s such a smorgasbord out there parents and kids are all struggling with trying to make sense out of the educational options that are available to them. At Northern Virginia Community College here—it’s one of the largest in the country—they have one guidance counselor for every thousand students. That’s not good enough. In fact, that may be worse than doing nothing. We have to beef up that side of what we do, which again, addresses this non-cognitive deficit that we’ve been talking about. I think that needs to happen across our educational training systems.
The other thing I would say is that employers need to get into the game as well. Employers, because of this demographic squeeze that we’re in, need to figure out how they can make more out of their existing workforce. We saw some of this during the pandemic and in the recovery from the pandemic where there was a distinct pattern of people being pulled up within businesses. The easy thing is to reach into the labor market and try to find that unicorn that you’re looking for. There seems to be some evidence to suggest that employers were doing more of the internal development of their workforces that needs to be done.
The traditional story is that there’s a real disincentive for companies to do that, because what you’re doing is you’re training your employee for their next job somewhere else. You’re making them more valuable and then they’ll leave. But if you can’t find workers, then you really have no choice. Perhaps this tight market has accomplished what maybe years of policy or hopes have not.
I think that’s right. The reason that employers have done that in the past is because it’s the fast solution. Even though it’s actually a very expensive way to acquire human capital. The amount of money that we spend on recruitment is a lot more than we spend on the development of the existing workforce. I think a tighter labor market makes people start to think about what their options are, and makes employers think about what their options are, rather than just hiring to try to solve the problem.
Do we need a different workplace environment for the 2023 worker? Do workers need to be treated differently in some fashion—not just being allowed to work a hybrid schedule—is there something in the actual relationship between employee and employer that needs to change for the modern younger worker?
It’s interesting that you ask, we did some survey work on this. When you ask younger workers, what is it that they want out of their jobs, obviously, everybody wants to get paid. That’s a very high value. But beneath that, for younger workers, flexibility was the next thing, and it was pretty close actually to salary. Younger workers report, “I need flexibility.” That does not mean they want remote work. In fact, they don’t value remote work. They value flexible schedules. Typically, they want to be in offices where they can learn. So what do they mean by flexibility? I think one of the things they mean is that their employer will work with them as they try to figure out what this working environment means for them.
Many people our age, Jim, we had jobs. I had my first job at 13 or 14 caddying on a golf course, working in pizza parlors, working on a farm. I did all sorts of stuff. So I had a sense of the norms of work before I actually got my first real job. That’s not the case anymore. Fewer and fewer kids have that experience of those early jobs. There’s a big information gap. So I think what younger workers are saying is that they need some help figuring out this transition. The other thing is that values have shifted. People have different expectations. Younger workers have different expectations about what they want out of a job. I think to keep them, employers are going have to be attentive to that or, in a tight labor market, just budget for a lot of turnover, if you aren’t going to try to accommodate those values. “I have got a lot going on in my life. I don’t want to check my email over the weekend.” Those kinds of things. So we’re definitely in a transition there as well.
Do we need to do a lot differently over the next 10 to 20 years? If AI becomes more prevalent, more important, diffuses throughout the economy, beyond technology companies, in all manners, all sectors, are we basically doing what we need to do to prepare people to be in that kind of work environment? Or is there a lot we need to do differently?
Again, I would just go back to this need to prepare people mentally, psychologically, emotionally, for a really profound shift that’s going on in terms of work and jobs and skills. The need to remain flexible, remain adaptable to the changes in technology. How we go about doing that, I think it is very important that people accept the fact that there’s no silver bullet preparation that’s going to make everything okay for the rest of your life. We see this in the numbers that about 90 percent of parents say they want their kids to major in engineering. Let’s be realistic here. Engineering’s a difficult job and it skews up the intelligence curve pretty high.
What I take out of that number is that people are very anxious about the economic futures of their children. They want the quick, easy answer. “Well, if I just get you into a STEM degree, everything’s going to be fine.” I think that if you went and talked to some of the computer scientists right now who have been laid off in fairly large numbers in Silicon Valley and elsewhere around the country, you probably find some disappointment there. “I was promised that if I did this, I would be set, and now I’m back into the job market.”
So I think that one of the ways that we can help people prepare is to start asking a different kind of question, which is not, “How am I going to support myself?” We want this to make the immediate leap to the economic outcome. Rather than doing that, we should be asking a different set of questions about what you are really gifted and skilled for. What do you like, what are your durable interests? So that you can capitalize on those. I just call this having an entrepreneurial mindset, even if you aren’t an entrepreneur, strictly speaking. But having an entrepreneurial mindset about your own life. What are your skills? What are your interests, what are your abilities? Then ask, how do I align that to the market? As I said, we typically do this the other way, which is what does the market need? Then, how do I prepare myself to get there? You always have to have that market conversation, but the first thing you need to do is understand yourself.
Brent, that’s awesome stuff. Thanks a lot for coming on the
podcast.
Thanks for having me.