PAGE_TITLE: 
	The divided brain and the making of the Western world | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Event Summary
On Thursday evening, AEI’s Brent Orrell hosted psychiatrist Iain McGilchrist and renowned comedian John Cleese for a screening of Dr. McGilchrist’s new documentary, “The Divided Brain.” Based on Dr. McGilchrist’s book, “The Master and His Emissary: The Divided Brain and the Making of the Western World” (Yale University Press, 2009), the documentary discusses the differences between the left and right hemispheres of the brain and what implications those differences have for modern society. Among other things, Dr. McGilchrist argues that the rigid analytical focus of the left brain hemisphere has come to dominate modern society, leading to the breakdown of the human relationships and social cohesion that bring a greater sense of perspective and meaning into daily life.
After the screening, Mr. Orrell and AEI’s Charles Murray led a panel discussion with Mr. Cleese and Dr. McGilchrist to probe deeper into these topics. Mr. Cleese discussed the ways he has seen Dr. McGilchrist’s theory reflected in his own life and career — including his academic experience at Cambridge — and how these findings should encourage a modern education system that effectively trains both “sides” of the brain.
— Caleb Seibert
Event Description
You are invited to the Washington, DC, premiere of “The Divided Brain,” a groundbreaking new documentary based on the work of British psychiatrist and literary expert Iain McGilchrist, author of “The Master and His Emissary: The Divided Brain and the Making of the Western World” (Yale University Press, 2009). This documentary explores differences in how the left and right brain hemispheres process information, which may be key to understanding many contemporary social challenges, from the breakdown in political discourse to environmental degradation.
Dr. McGilchrist believes that the left brain hemisphere, responsible for the close analysis required for technological innovation, may be “colonizing” the right hemisphere that manages broad perception and social interaction. If he is right, we may be creating technologies and conditions that inhibit the human relationships and social cohesion required for life in democratic societies and market economies.
Invitations to this event are nontransferable. Please contact us if you have any questions.