PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Social Workplace: Social Capital, Human Dignity, and Work in America, Volume III | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Executive Summary
In this report, we analyze 41 interviews of participants in an earlier quantitative survey of worker attitudes. These interviews were targeted to survey participants age 22–29 to better understand the priorities and concerns of younger workers.
Our findings underscore the paramount importance of flexibility and purpose in work. Our analysis suggests the definition of flexibility varies widely among individual participants, but it most consistently means the freedom to balance work with family, education, and other interests. With regard to finding meaning in work, the pursuit of purpose through employment transcends educational boundaries. The report concludes that young workers seek not only economic rewards but also roles that are fulfilling and contribute to their communities, indicating a shift toward valuing both material and social aspects of work.
Economic anxiety also surfaced as a significant issue for younger workers. Such anxiety is more prevalent among those with less education and familial support and less so among those with greater education and familial support, particularly among those who are married or in committed partnerships. Saving and investment for the future, the capacity for which is tied to education levels, wages, and job security, is consistently linked to lower levels of economic anxiety.
Read the full pdf.
Introduction
In this third and final installment of our report series on the social dimensions of work, we turn to the workforce’s future. Younger workers are fundamental to shaping the economic future, a reality driven by demographics and baby boomers’ impending retirement. This transition raises crucial questions about those who will step into workplace leadership roles and how they will adapt to a workplace that is being reshaped continuously by technology and evolving social norms. Addressing these questions is essential for carving out strategies that align with the next generation of workers’ aspirations and capabilities.
Our journey through this series drew inspiration from Adam Smith’s
The Theory of Moral Sentiments.
Smith’s insight into the social nature of humans offers a framework for understanding today’s workplace dynamics. He proposed that work is not just a necessity for survival but an expression of man’s inherently social nature. From a Smithian viewpoint, markets are human sociality at scale. This sociality creates the impetus for exchange and leads to the norms, rules, and laws that govern it. The invisible hand may govern markets, but that hand is a human one, made up of the individual decisions that shape production, prices, and employment. Jobs and workplaces are important parts of this unfathomably complex mechanism. In the end, markets can thrive only to the degree to which the people who create them and work within them thrive.
To better understand how younger workers think about their jobs and workplaces, we commissioned follow-up interviews with a sample of the original survey participants. We discovered that flexibility, while universally valued, fluctuated in terms of its definition. Whether it means balancing work with family life, pursuing educational goals, or dedicating time to other interests, flexibility is a multifaceted concept that varies widely among young workers.
Purpose, too, is a deeply personal pursuit. Consistent with Smith’s insights about work and sociality, our survey results show that young workers find meaning in making contributions that positively affect those around them— coworkers, customers, and society more broadly. This search for purpose reflects a related desire to engage in work that is economically rewarding and meaningful.
Another important finding of our research underscores the role of education in mitigating economic anxieties, both in the short and long term. A higher level of educational attainment not only opens more and better career opportunities but also instills a sense of security and confidence in navigating the contemporary labor market.
Investment in long-term economic security also surfaced as a central theme. Our findings suggest that young workers who actively engage in financial planning and investment strategies tend to feel more secure about their future.
Read the full report.