PAGE_TITLE: 
	Minding Our Workforce: The Role of Noncognitive Skills in Career Success | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

About the Compilation
Our economy increasingly needs people with strong “humane”
skills and the capacity to relate well to others, including coworkers, clients,
and customers. Inadequate preparation in this domain of so-called noncognitive
or soft skills impairs innovation, communication, and business performance.
That is why employers highlight the demand for these skills when they talk
about what is missing in the workforce.
The chapters in this volume are from leading experts in
research and practice in noncognitive skills, covering topics such as brain
function, labor market data, and promising strategies for incorporating the development
of such skills in human services and job training. In short, the authors tell
us where these attributes originate, why they are important, and how we can get
more of them.
Read the PDF.
Introduction
In my 2018
American Enterprise Institute report “STEM Without Fruit: How Noncognitive
Skills Improve Workforce Outcomes,” I argued that a serious imbalance has
developed between US education and training priorities and the American
economy’s actual needs and demands.
1
Data from
the US Bureau of Labor Statistics show that STEM-related occupations amount
to a small portion of the total US workforce and are likely to remain
comparatively small as a share of the total economy and that the
occupations with the highest demand and economic returns actually require
high levels of noncognitive skills. For better or worse, the vast majority
of Americans are and will continue to work in fields unrelated to STEM,
and as automation continues to take over routinized work, those with
strong “people-facing,” noncognitive skills are best positioned to take advantage
of emerging work opportunities and fulfilling careers.
This volume lays a foundation for understanding the theoretical basis of the importance of noncognitive skills and the need for greater policymaker attention to them. Because of the difficulties involved in defining and teaching these skills, they often become a “we know them when we see them” phenomena, vital but often vague, and essential to success but hard to convert into policies and curricula. Overcoming this challenge is worth our attention and best thought, reflection, and effort, even if the effort does not translate quickly into specific actionable recommendations.
Read the full compilation.
Notes
1. Brent Orrell,
“STEM Without Fruit: How Noncognitive Skills Improve Workforce Outcomes,”
American Enterprise Institute, November 14, 2018, https://www.aei.org/research-products/report/stem-without-fruit-how-noncognitive-skills-improveworkforce-outcomes/.