PAGE_TITLE: 
	A Road Map to Reemployment in the COVID-19 Economy: Empowering Workers, Employers, and States | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Key Points
Before the COVID-19 pandemic, the US workforce system struggled to support workers and job seekers in a strong economy. It is not designed to support the millions of newly unemployed workers that will be seeking jobs as the economy reopens.
Building a workforce system that can meet this demand will require a fundamental rethink of the system to enable greater flexibility—for workers, states, employers, and workforce system leaders alike—to support wide-ranging needs and to be able to adapt to changing local economic conditions.
Two key pillars of change—state flexibility and worker support—are necessary to ease the return to work during the restart.
Read the PDF.
Executive Summary
The COVID-19 pandemic and the subsequent economic and employment
crises that have ensued have put unprecedented pressure on the US workforce
system. Tens of millions of Americans, par­ticularly lower-income and service
workers, have lost their jobs, many of which may not return anytime soon, if
ever. As a result, millions of these workers will need to make difficult career
transitions as our economies reopen and will be attempting to do so in diverse
local economies that are facing a myriad of challenges. The workforce system
has struggled previously in a strong economy to support workers looking for
stable employ­ment, so meeting this surge in demand will require a fundamental
rethink of how the system operates.
First, we must shift away from national
policies and initiatives that set policy at a distance from actual needs and
conditions. Instead, our approach focuses on creating the flexibility for
state, regional, and local leaders in allocating crucial resources and
supporting workers in making decisions about skill development and employment
that are tailored to their skills, inter­ests, and abilities.
These two pillars, strategic state-led
investment and worker flexibility, are the core of the road map to workforce
recovery. Under our policy construct, gov­ernors have control of special
COVID-19 relief work­force system moneys, directing funds in partnership with local
government and business leaders where need and opportunity are greatest among a
state’s regional economies.
Second, states must work with local
leaders to reinforce their regional and sector-based approach to workforce
development, aligning strategies and investments in businesses and job seekers
to the needs of the local economy. Lastly, a shift toward the use of real-time,
easy-to-access labor market informa­tion can empower policymakers, workers, and
busi­nesses in developing the talent they need now and will need in the future.
To support worker flexibility, job seekers are pro­vided the
financial resources they need to acquire training through Personal Reemployment
Accounts, which help maximize worker choice in identifying and pursuing
training that fits their individual needs and interests. These resources will
be highly flex­ible and can be used for a broad range of training opportunities
and supportive services, such as trans­portation and childcare, that can
facilitate a return to work. Lastly, for harder-to-serve workers with multiple
barriers, limited work histories, or other challenges, the road map proposes
investments in reimaged American Job Centers (AJC) that reduce bureaucratic
obstacles and expand access to tailored reemployment services. We believe this
combina­tion of worker flexibility and strengthened AJCs will allow millions of
workers to return to jobs quickly while reserving more intensive services for
those in greatest need.
As
the pandemic continues, and state and regional economies reopen on different
schedules, the workforce system requires a flexible and adaptable approach that
can address the widely varying needs that states, regions, and localities face.
The road map to workforce recovery will help create a more agile system and
move resources closer to the people and
organizations that need them most.
Introduction
Rebuilding the
economy is going to require a thorough rethinking of how the nation supports
workers facing challenging employment transitions. Recent work by the US Government
Accountability Office
1
and the American Enterprise Institute
(AEI)
2
describes a workforce system mired in
burdensome regulations, difficult for both businesses and job seek­ers to
navigate, and arguably ineffective in its primary mission of helping American
workers find, retain, and advance in employment. All this was true before the
COVID-19 crisis struck and will be even more evi­dent as displaced workers
attempt to reattach to jobs during an uncertain economy. Serious reform of the
public workforce system is now needed to comple­ment and reinforce other
federal economic recovery investments in the business and finance sectors. The
US government must ensure that as many workers as possible have the resources
and support they need to get back to work.
Two key points frame our thinking in this
regard. First, we need to shift our focus away from national initiatives and
toward states and regions, as each will face different obstacles and
opportunities in the coming months. A focus on flexibility—for workers,
primarily, but also for businesses, governors, local officials, and public
workforce system leaders—will be essential.
Second, we will need a spectrum of
services and resources to provide for the wide range of challenges newly
unemployed workers face. Tens of millions of workers have filed for
unemployment in the past two months, peaking at about 40 million before begin­ning
a recent decline. Official unemployment is 11.1 percent, while broader measures
that consider underemployment (those working less than full time) are 18
percent. A recent McKinsey Global Institute report estimates that up to 86
percent of the jobs vulnerable to the early displacement or lay­offs from
COVID-19 pay less than $40,000 per year and over 98 percent pay less than
$69,000.
3
Unem­ployment is affecting every sector
of the economy and every type of worker—from service employees to manufacturing
workers. Even fields such as health care have seen layoffs despite the most
urgent health crisis in a century.
As we have seen, the nation’s programs for support­ing
unemployed workers are struggling. One study found that nearly half of the 40
million workers who have filed for unemployment in recent months either have
been denied or have yet to receive both state and federal benefits at a time
when people need this relief the most.
4
These numbers suggest that the pub­lic workforce system, which
oversees the programs designed to help workers access training, job-search, and
supportive services, is also likely to become over­whelmed by job-hungry
workers as state and regional economies reopen.
We
need a strategy flexible enough to support workers regardless of previous
levels of education and employment and that is easily adaptable to local
economic conditions. The good news is that mil­lions have been able to remain
on company payrolls and can return to the jobs they had thanks to the fed­eral
Paycheck Protection Program.
5
But millions of others—especially in the services sector, which
accounts for 80 percent of all American jobs—will be looking for new work in a
chaotic and competitive job market.
6
These workers will need the best infor­mation possible to help
align their skills to emerging and market demands and flexible resources to pay
for training that can help them qualify for new types of work. For the
remaining workers, who were likely already struggling with a wide range of
barriers to maintaining stable employment before the epidemic, longer-term,
intensive assistance will be required to help them regain a foothold in the
economy.
Read the full report.
Notes
1. Gene L. Dodaro,
“Government Efficiency and Effectiveness: Opportunities to Reduce
Fragmentation, Overlap, and Duplication and Achieve Billions in Financial
Benefits,” testimony before the Subcommittee on Federal Spending Oversight and
Emergency Man­agement, Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs,
US Senate, May 21, 2019, https://www.gao.gov/assets/700/ 699214.pdf.
2. Mason M. Bishop,
“Landscape Study of Federal Employment and Training Programs,” American
Enterprise Institute, January 28, 2020,
https://www.aei.org/research-products/report/landscape-study-of-federal-employment-and-training-programs/.
3. Susan Lund et
al., “Lives and Livelihoods: Assessing the Near-Term Impact of COVID-19 on US
Workers,” McKinsey & Company, April 2, 2020,
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/public-sector/our-insights/lives-and-livelihoods-assessing-the-near-term-impact-of-covid-19-on-us-workers.
4. Abigail Hess,
“Study Finds 44% of U.S. Unemployment Applicants Have Been Denied or Are Still
Waiting,” CNBC, May 15, 2020,
https://www.cnbc.com/2020/05/15/44percent-of-us-unemployment-applicants-have-been-denied-or-are-waiting.html.
5. Brent Orrell,
“Don’t Attack Pandemic Unemployment. It Did What It Was Meant to Do.,”
RealClearPolicy, June 3, 2020, https:// www.realclearpolicy.com/articles/2020/06/03/dont_attack_pandemic_unemployment_compensation_it_did_what_it_was_meant_
to_do_495076.html.
6. H. Plecher, “Distribution of the
Workforce Across Economic Sectors in the United States from 2009 to 2019,”
Statistica, July 15, 2020,
https://www.statista.com/statistics/270072/distribution-of-the-workforce-across-economic-sectors-in-the-united-states/#:~:
text=The%20statistic%20shows%20the%20distribution,and%2079.41%20percent%20in%20services.