PAGE_TITLE: 
	On the Front Porch with Brent Orrell and Tony Pipa: A Conversation with Nicholas F. Jacobs | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

VIDEO
Event Summary
On January 25, AEI’s Brent Orrell and the Brookings Institution’s Tony Pipa hosted the first of a series of conversations “On the Front Porch” with authors of recent research on issues facing rural America. Mr. Orrell and Mr. Pipa spoke with Nicholas F. Jacobs, the author of
The Rural Voter: The Politics of Place and the Disuniting of America
, a recent book that examines the state of politics in rural America.
They considered the book’s central claim, that rural Americans have combined a deep sense of place with increasingly nationalized policy and political concerns to form a distinct voting bloc in recent years. They also discussed the history of rural America; the social, economic, and political forces that have changed it in recent years; and the notion of a stark rural-urban divide. Mr. Orrell, Mr. Pipa, and Dr. Jacobs concluded by emphasizing the importance of dispelling myths about rural America to overcome distrust and disunity.
—David Veldran
Event Description
Contemporary differences between rural and urban America have their roots in long-term demographic, economic, technological, and social factors. In a new event series, AEI’s Brent Orrell and the Brookings Institution’s Tony Pipa host conversations “On the Front Porch” with authors of recent research on issues facing rural America. These discussions will explore the unique challenges and opportunities facing rural America and consider policy options to promote development and opportunity outside the nation’s major metropolitan areas.
For their first conversation, Mr. Orrell and Mr. Pipa will be “on the front porch” with Nicholas F. Jacobs, whose recent book,
The Rural Voter: The Politics of Place and the Disuniting of America
, examines how rural residents combine a deep sense of place with increasingly nationalized policy and political concerns.
Event Materials
Nicholas F. Jacobs and Daniel M. Shea,
The Rural Voter: The Politics of Place and the Disuniting of
America