PAGE_TITLE: 
	Dignity at Work: Reimagining Talent Acquisition and Retention with Worker Dignity at the Center | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Key Points
Post-pandemic, the labor market is facing a worker
retention crisis. At the center is a misunderstanding of what humans need to
flourish as productive and satisfied workers.
Work is a
subset of human social behavior, making worker engagement and environment—not
just pay—vital to retention, performance, and well-being.
Talent acquisition and retention should be
reimagined through three interlocking principles:
recognition
of human dignity; ongoing
development
of interests, knowledge, skills, and abilities (IKSAs);
and the alignment of IKSAs to tasks that promote
expression
of dignity.
While entailing costs in time, attention, and
resources, human-centered talent development provides offsetting savings via
retention and productivity over time.
Read the PDF.
Introduction
After almost a year of a pandemic-induced labor
shortage, employers are facing two unique issues with developing talent. The
first is attracting workers in an economy that is over three million workers
short of the optimal level and in which workers have ample choice among
potential jobs.
1
The second and related challenge is
retention. Since normal or near-normal
economic activity has resumed, labor market “quits” have hit record
highs, with around 3 percent of workers (four million) turning over each month.
2
During 2021, 47.4 million people voluntarily quit their jobs.
3
Despite rapid increases in wages, employer-employee connections are thinning. Slowing churn and increasing retention require reimagining talent development with the worker at the center. To build more robust and durable employer-employee connection requires greater recognition and development of individual dignity and improved alignment among interests, knowledge, skills, and abilities (IKSAs) and tasks.
Read the full report.
Notes
Brent Orrell, “The Unforgiving Math of the US Labor Market,” Dispatch, March 4, 2022,
https://www.aei.org/op-eds/the-unforgiving-math-of-the-u-s-labor-market/
.
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Quits: Total Nonfarm, 2022,
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/JTSQUR
.
Anneken Tappe, “A Record Number of Americans Quit Their Jobs in 2021,” ABC57, February 1, 2022,
https://www.abc57.com/ news/a-record-number-of-americans-quit-their-jobs-in-2021
.