PAGE_TITLE: 
	Success Is Not a Sequence | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

The “success sequence” — the argument that avoiding poverty depends on graduating from high school, getting a full-time job, and marrying before having children — is enjoying a minor resurgence in policy circles of late.
Brookings Institution scholars Ron Haskins and Isabel Sawhill — key thinkers on welfare policy issues who cluster around the center of the ideological spectrum — first proffered this theory based on an analysis of social and economic outcomes for individuals who complete the sequence versus those who do not. Their reading of the data showed that individuals who completed high school, worked full-time, and avoided non-marital births had only a small chance of experiencing poverty and a very good chance of joining the middle class. Do these three things, Haskins and Sawhill said, and you’ll be fine. AEI’s Brad Wilcox has also published extensively on this topic including
a 2017 report
looking at the success sequence among Millenials, which I commend to readers interested in the topic.
Image via Twenty20
Naturally, such clear, concise, and values-laden direction provoked, and continues to provoke, controversy. For some, like blogger
Matt Bruenig
, the success sequence is about trying to impose a pro-marriage cultural narrative while eliding the fact that full-time work does, in his words, the “heavy lifting” in reducing poverty. Richard Reeves, also of Brookings,
departs
partly from Bruenig’s analysis pointing to data showing that the success sequence works better for Caucasians than African-Americans. Reeves says the sequence overlooks a complex interplay of education, labor market, and racial discrimination in keeping even African-American families who adhere to the sequence poorer than their white counterparts. Cato Institute scholar Michael Tanner
weighed in
last spring to say “correlation is not causation” and that even these three factors (education, employment, and child bearing) influence each other to the point that chicken and egg are indistinguishable.
I’m closest to Tanner in this discussion. The success sequence, while it has clarity and illuminates the core characteristics of a successful life, is incomplete and unsatisfying as a guide either to government policy or individual practice. Telling people that they, too, can go to Paris when they lack a passport, a ticket, and a sense of how to get to the airport (or even why such a trip might be a nice thing) is more notable for what it leaves out than for what it teaches. Why would we expect a child growing up in a town or neighborhood with few intact families, a 50 percent drop-out rate, and high levels of unemployment to recognize the value of marriage, education, and work? These are challenging life-tasks even under good circumstances. Without modeling and reinforcement, it is a testimony to human resilience that so many disadvantaged kids achieve them anyway.
Looked at this way, the elements of the success sequence are less the cause of a good life than markers of such a life already underway. A strong marriage relationship creates a stable, nurturing home that leads to a happy childhood that forges educational and economic success. In the normal course of life, this cycle is renewed in another strong marriage and so on. Easy to say, much harder to do. Each step in the cycle is strenuous and complex, embedded in a years-long dialogue between the child, parents, and the surrounding community. That dialogue builds up implicit knowledge — positive, unconscious habits of thought and action — that shape the values, beliefs, and behaviors undergirding success. When the dialogue is corrupted, this implicit knowledge base can be damaged or lost. The intractability of intergenerational poverty has shown us that efforts to rebuild this knowledge is expensive, difficult, and, too often, a failure.
Raj Chetty’s
recent study
on the importance of local neighborhoods for the socioeconomic outcomes of children reminded me of a critical role that families play in the long-term success of children. The study found that economic mobility for poor children is influenced by key factors in their immediate neighborhoods including the percentage of single-parent families and adults in the workforce. The study found marriage and work are strongly correlated with higher mean incomes in these neighborhoods resulting in greater economic mobility for children. Chetty says low-income boys growing up in these healthier neighborhoods earn about 35 percent more as adults than similarly situated boys in areas a few blocks away with more single-parent families and lower work participation. Such is the power and influence of intact families and regular work that people benefit from them just by proximity.
The success sequence findings and further studies by Chetty and other scholars continue to drive home the point that much of what we understand to be a good life is heavily influenced by individual choices and community environment. We owe these scholars a great debt for keeping these truths in front of us. Our challenge going forward is the slow, difficult process of rebuilding the social dialogue between individuals, families, and communities that keeps people on a pathway to success.