PAGE_TITLE: 
	Cities Are in Trouble in the Age of COVID, but This Doesn’t Have to Be the End | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

In recent years, a handful of America’ biggest cities have experienced massive economic growth built on the agglomeration effects arising in major urban areas. Just four major cities — New York, Chicago, San Francisco, and Seattle — accounted for
90 percent of the increase in job density
in US metro areas between 2004 and 2015. With this surge in job density came
highly educated, young, white-collar workers moving to cities
, which in turn drove up the cost of living as these workers chased limited supplies of housing and amenities. Unsustainable trends, as they say, aren’t sustainable — the rate of people moving in
has slowed drastically
, and
many families
and
low-income workers
have been priced out.
A pedestrian walks on an nearly empty Wall St., as the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak continues in New York City, New York, U.S., March 23, 2020. REUTERS/Mike Segar
Even with decreased in-migration flows and the loss of low-wage workers and families, there was an expectation that young white-collar workers could continue to power the economy of cities. As with many other facets and expectations of American life, COVID may be upending conventional wisdom. In light of the shutdowns, many younger New Yorkers (and no doubt residents of other cities) have started asking themselves:
Why do we live here
? Many of them moved to cities for certain benefits — economic opportunity, cultural diversity, nightlife — that have been rendered uncertain by rolling closures, shutdowns, and social distancing rules that have no clear end in sight. For instance, Broadway and the Apollo Theater
have shut down
and are unlikely to reopen in the near future, and by the end of June, it is likely that
over ten percent
of New York’s restaurants will be permanently closed.
If the history of pandemics and other crises teaches us anything, it’s that cities are resilient and there’s no reason
the future of cities
cannot be brighter than the past — assuming the right kind of leadership and policies. First, it is necessary to address high housing prices driven by a lack of development and NIMBY-style zoning laws. Lower tax rates and more business-friendly regulatory regimes can help build the economic foundations of cities, shore up tax bases and services, and strengthen the foundation of urban life for city residents. These are simple steps, but that does not mean they are easy — many of these proposals face resistance from entrenched interests.
Cities require a combination of density and dynamism, and the coronavirus has hurt them on both counts. But there is no reason not to believe that, given the right leadership and policies, the best is yet to come for cities and the people who call them home.