PAGE_TITLE: 
	We Need Early Release Policies for Older Prisoners During COVID-19 | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Since the early days of the COVID-19 pandemic, public health authorities have designated older adults as “high-risk” for serious complications and have recommended
extra precautions
to protect them from the disease. Those in congregated settings like nursing homes have suffered extremely high rates of infection, serious illness, and death. While
11 percent
of all COVID infections have been among nursing home residents, they account for 35 percent of deaths.
Prisons are another institutional setting with large numbers of older adults living in facilities where it is difficult to maintain high levels of disinfection and social distancing. A combination of increased numbers of
incarcerations
among older individuals, mandatory minimum sentences, and three-strike rules has resulted in an increasingly elderly and vulnerable prison population. As of 2016, more than one in 10 inmates in state correctional facilities are over the age of 55,
surpassing
those aged 18–24 for the first time.
Via Reuters
The impact of
COVID on prisons
has been significant. As of May 20, prison systems had reported almost 30,000 infections among inmates and 414 deaths. Prison staff have also suffered from almost 7,500 reported infections and 33 deaths. Massachusetts has one of the highest proportions of older prisoners, with
15.23 percent
of its inmates over 55. As of May 13, over
350 prisoners
have been diagnosed with the virus and eight prisoners have
died
. Michigan, with
11.66 percent
of its inmates over 55, has had over
2,000
infections and more than
40
deaths.
As states look toward early release to reduce the incidence of COVID-19 infections and deaths, the elderly should be given top priority. This is not the same as proposing a blanket release policy, even for elderly prisoners. We must screen for both health and public safety
risks
prior to release, and use those results to inform our decisions about who can be moved to community monitoring or other less restrictive forms of confinement.
Even the public safety concerns relating to early release have a context that demands attention.  Older prisoners are significantly
less likely
to recidivate than younger prisoners. Prisoners released between ages 50–65 under early-release policies produce a re-arrest rate of about 2 percent. For those over the age of 65, the re-arrest rate is practically zero. Releasing these older prisoners would have the additional benefit of reducing prison
health costs
as well as strain on under-resourced prison health systems.
Like all public policy, criminal justice involves risks and trade-offs. The COVID moment presents significant health risks to prisoners and staff, and, if handled incorrectly, public safety risks as well. By carefully examining both health and safety risks and using early release in a prudent way, we should be able to reduce COVID infections, save lives, and protect the public while getting our oldest and most vulnerable prisoners out from behind bars.