PAGE_TITLE: 
	Rethinking Reentry: Strengthening Programs and Promoting Personal Agency Among Returning Citizens | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Event Summary
Persistently high rates of reoffending have long puzzled criminal justice researchers. On Friday at AEI, contributors to “Rethinking Reentry” (AEI, 2020), edited by AEI’s Brent Orrell, discussed “what works” in helping formerly incarcerated adults avoid returning to incarceration.
Jocelyn Fontaine from Arnold Ventures began by describing how reentry programs are often poorly implemented and how a harsh prison environment can make returning from prison difficult. After her remarks, Gerard Robinson of the Center for Advancing Opportunity moderated a panel with RTI International’s Pamela Lattimore, Urban Institute’s Janeen Buck Willison, and George Mason University’s Faye Taxman. The panelists agreed that we should strive for better implementation methods, research methods, and evidence in determining what works in prisoner reentry.
Mr. Orrell moderated the second panel. RAND Corporation’s Shawn Bushway pointed out that not everyone fails in the reentry process. Crime rates have decreased sharply, and many people never return to prison, suggesting that policy should be oriented to support an individual’s journey to desistance. Mr. Orrell described a new reentry model focused on identity change and the restoration of personal agency. Finally, Christy Visher of the University of Delaware spoke about how therapeutic communities can rectify certain aspects of prison culture.
— Tony To
Event Materials
Brent Orrell: “
Rethinking Reentry
”
Event Description
In AEI’s new edited volume “Rethinking Reentry,” leading researchers, scholars, and policymakers dig into the research around what works in prisoner reentry. Federal, state, and local criminal justice agencies continue to struggle with making meaningful and lasting reductions in criminal recidivism. The authors of “Rethinking Reentry” shine a light on different strategies for reducing recidivism through reforming current reentry approaches to more far-reaching proposals for reconceptualizing and responding to the challenges of reentry.
Join Brent Orrell and a panel of experts as they grapple with various questions: How do we strengthen the current approach to reentry? How do we promote and strengthen personal agency in the reentry context? Are there models that should be experimented with test alternatives to the current approaches to reentry?
Join the conversation on social media with @AEI on
Twitter
and
Facebook
.
VIDEO
Related Material
The jigsaw puzzle of prisoner reentry
Brent Orrell and Dirk Van Velzen | “Prison Scholar Fund” | October 2019