PAGE_TITLE: 
	Biden’s Skills and Workforce Development Agenda Lacks Immediacy | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

President Biden and some of his allies on Capitol Hill have taken a
fair bit
of
ribbing
in the past few weeks for applying a highly elastic definition to the term “infrastructure.” Everything, when the president, his team, and his party really think about it, turns out to contribute to revitalized infrastructure. The same elasticity is being applied to the topic of skills and workforce development, to the point that some of the things that were being categorized as infrastructure, like expanded social care programs, are also turning up as jobs.
As we noted several months ago in a report on the
Biden skills agenda
, this elasticity has been a factor since the campaign, during which candidate Biden announced that he favored a massive federal investment in “home-based care” for the elderly and the disabled as part of his jobs strategy. Without passing judgment on the merits of whether the federal government should increase spending on such needs, we noted that in the actual immediate employment challenges the country faces in the post-COVID world — namely, sustained high unemployment among women, minorities, and youth — the home-based care initiative didn’t seem to add much that was of immediate relevance.
Unfortunately, as the administration passes the 100-day mark, the Biden White House continues to demonstrate a lack a vision for how it is going to assist workers in adjusting to an economy in which large numbers of
service, hospitality, and retail jobs have disappeared
with little certainty about how many might return and when. In some of the industries in which these low-wage and entry-level workers have traditionally found jobs (food and accommodation and recreation services), output is down 18 to 31 percent compared to what it would have been without the pandemic. As
The New York Times
noted, “that matters both for the businesses on the losing end of those shifts and for their workers,
who may need to find their way into
the growing sectors
.” [emphasis added] For an administration that has prided itself on “equity” for marginalized populations, the absence of any apparent urgency in helping these workers rejoin the labor force in the short term is perplexing.
What’s urgently needed — and nowhere in sight within the Biden administration’s plans — are tangible,
serious proposals
for rapid reemployment services; initiatives to fund flexible, short-term retraining or upskilling of workers; or investments in improved labor market information systems that would help workers identify growth-sector opportunities that match their interests, skills, and geography. Grand economic strategy and long-term thinking have their time and place, but they are no substitutes for immediate measures to help workers find jobs in the here and now.