PAGE_TITLE: 
	Quantum: Computing’s Next Wave | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Quantum computing is on the cusp of transforming entire industries—from drug discovery to cybersecurity—by radically advancing our ability to solve complex problems. But misconceptions about the technology being perpetually “far off” have stopped many people from exploring quantum’s current capabilities. We are still in the early days of quantum computing, but practical applications are already here, with quantum optimization algorithms tackling real-world challenges in finance, transportation, healthcare and more every day.
Below are the highlights from my conversation with Alan Baratz, CEO of D-Wave, a commercial quantum company. Alan has spearheaded bringing quantum optimization solutions into the consumer mainstream, applying them to real-world challenges like tsunami relief and carbon emission reduction. With over 25 years of experience developing leading technologies, he provides an insider view into the realities and possibilities of quantum computing.
Below is a lightly edited and abridged transcript of our discussion. You can listen to
this
and
other episodes
of Explain to Shane on AEI.org and subscribe via your preferred listening platform. If you enjoyed this episode, leave us a review, and tell your friends and colleagues to tune in.
Shane Tews: Can you start us off by explaining the difference between a quantum computing, traditional classic computing, Quantum edge computing, which is what you’re doing. We keep hearing that quantum is so far away, but you’re doing it, so enlighten us.
Alan Baratz: Quantum computing is nothing more than using quantum mechanical effects—things like superposition, entanglement, tunneling—to be able to solve hard computational problems much faster than they can be solved classically. There are two primary approaches to quantum computing. One is known as annealing, and the other is known as gate. They are each good at solving different types of problems.
Annealing quantum computers are very good at solving optimization problems—things like employee scheduling, autonomous vehicle routing on manufacturing plant floors, or how to assign countermeasures to take out incoming missiles. These are all hard optimization problems, and annealing quantum computers are very good at solving those problems.
Gate model systems, on the other hand, are very good at solving differential equations, problems like quantum chemistry, or new materials development. While annealing is good at optimization, it’s not very good at differential equations; and while gate model is very good at differential equations, it’s not very good at optimization. You need both classes of quantum computers to be able to solve the broad array of hard problems that governments and businesses need to solve.
You mentioned autonomous vehicles and scheduling. Is that supply chain management scheduling that you’re talking about?
We have a customer that provides software to shipping ports to manage how cranes move cargo containers across the port from the ships onto the port, and then ultimately, on to the trucks. Our customer quantum-enabled their software to help compute the optimal movement of the cranes moving containers throughout the port. They found that using the schedules generated by the quantum computer, each crane could move up to 60 percent more containers in a day than the schedules the classical computers were developing. This has allowed them to increase the throughput through the port by about 12 percent. So this is a very concrete example, in the supply chain logistics arena of how quantum computers today can add value.
We keep hearing that quantum isn’t here yet, but you already have customers.
Yes, we have over 60 customers that we are working with to leverage our quantum computer today across a variety of different industries and use cases. For example, we’re working with MasterCard on improving customer loyalty rewards—basically optimizing which programs get offered to which card holders and on fraud detection. We’re working with Davidson technology, as a government contractor, on missile targeting as well as radar assignment. We’re working with grocery chain Patterson food group on employee scheduling, e-commerce, and grocery delivery.
What’s important is that we are commercial and we are the only quantum computing company that is commercial today. There’s a reason for that. A bit earlier, I mentioned that there are two primary approaches to quantum: annealing and gate. At D-wave, we decided to start with annealing because it’s good at solving optimization problems and we felt that those were really important problems that needed to be solved. But, it’s also a much easier technology to work with: it’s easier to scale. It’s much less sensitive to noise and errors.
Everybody else decided to start with gate model, and the problem with gate model is that it’s very temperamental. It’s very sensitive to noise in areas. It’s very difficult to scale. We are probably seven or more years away from having a gate model quantum computer that is large enough, quiet enough, and low enough error rates to be able to do useful commercial work.
I know that the qubits like to be cold. The reading that I do indicates is that are you using something that is less sensitive, but still as powerful mathematically.
There are different underlying technologies that are used to build quantum computers. Superconducting is one of them. Those are the quantum computers that need to run very cold, close to absolute zero. We do use superconducting technology for annealing quantum computers and we use it for the gait model systems we are building as well. Since we use superconducting technology, we do run cold.
There are other approaches to building quantum computers that don’t have to run cold. However, we believe superconducting is the best technology for building quantum computers. The reason is that when you build a quantum computer, you need to balance between isolating the qubits from the environment (so that you’re not interrupting the quantum mechanical effects) while also allowing those qubits to interact with one another so that they can do computation.
Some of the technologies for building quantum computers are so good at isolating the qubits from the environment that they’re also isolating the qubits from one another. That makes it very difficult for them to interact. Whereas other technologies are less good at isolating from the environment, but the qubits can interact better with one another. For example, you have trapped ions on one end of the spectrum, which are very good at isolating the qubits from the environment. But, as a result, it’s very hard to get them to interact so they run more slowly with respect to performing computation.
Are other countries more engaged in quantum? Are we lagging?
We are absolutely lagging. First of all, we’re lagging in terms of dollar investment. China, for example, is investing about 15 billion in quantum computing. The US is investing less than four billion. Second of all, our primary funding vehicle needed reauthorization. And that hadn’t been done yet. US investment is through the National Quantum Initiative Act, a 10-year act that was put in place about five years ago. It needed to be reauthorized this past September, but it was not. Congress failed to reauthorize it, not because they didn’t want to, but because they’ve got other problems that they’re dealing with right now. This national quantum initiative must get reauthorized so that we can continue moving forward.
Third, the US government is not focused on two very important elements of quantum. They are very focused on gate, but only gate. That’s a big miss on the part of the US government, because they’re missing important technologies. Other countries are inclusive of all quantum technology. Also, the US government is not focused on near-term use of quantum. All the money is going to funding long-term technology or research instead. That’s a big mess, especially when other countries are already starting to use quantum in support of government problems and needs. We must not only reauthorize the national quantum initiative, but fix it to be inclusive of all quantum technologies be supportive of near-term use of quantum not just long-term research.