PAGE_TITLE: 
	To Reach the Full Potential of 5G, Continue to Embrace Free Markets | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

In 2018,
Axios
reported that President Donald Trump’s national security officials were considering using some Department of Defense (DoD) spectrum to build a nationalized 5G wireless network. The plan faced swift opposition from several policy experts, the telecommunications industry, and the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). Well, part of that ill-fated plan appears to be back, as the DoD has put out a
request for information
(RFI) asking how it could “own and operate 5G networks for its domestic operations” and work with contractors to run a civilian 5G network as part of a dynamic spectrum sharing agreement.
via Twenty20
As was true in 2018, the DoD has no business running a
civilian mobile network. AT&T, T-Mobile, and Verizon have already heavily
invested to bring 5G wireless to their customers through the open market. These
mobile carriers have worked with global vendors to create secure supply chains
and build a more secure next-generation network architecture with improved
capabilities.
The RFI relates to a proposal for the DoD to share 3.45 to
3.55 gigahertz (GHz) spectrum — also known as mid-band spectrum — with one
chosen commercial provider rather than have it go to the market for a public
auction. The request seeks one contractor to come up with “innovative solutions
and alternative approaches to enable [dynamic spectrum sharing] within the
Department’s currently allocated spectrum with the goal of accelerating
spectrum sharing decisions and 5G deployment.” It asks for help finding “the
best methods for sharing spectrum with both military and civilian users,” which
is another way of saying the DoD wants to keep the spectrum instead of giving
it to the commercial market.
Why? There is no market failure that needs to be addressed here. The FCC’s
Facilitate America’s Superiority in 5G Technology
plan was designed to push more spectrum into the commercial market, update infrastructure policy to allow for newer, more innovative 5G technology, and modernize outdated regulations that could impede the rollout of 5G technologies. This is government being helpful rather than hoarding valuable resources with an agenda.
Mid-band spectrum is qualitatively different and very
valuable for commercial wireless providers trying to offer the best 5G
connectivity for consumers. This spectrum needs to be available to the open
market so investors and innovators can ensure that 5G technologies meet their
full potential for improving capacity and latency over previous generations of
wireless technology. The promised improvements are why investors look at
spectrum availability, not the DoD, as the key element for transformative 5G
networks of the future.
The question remains: Do we want the military running an internally managed mobile telecommunications company? Sen. John Thune (R-SD) and many of his colleagues have answered no in a
letter
urging the DoD to “remain on [a] free-market path.” Republicans in the House and Senate have also introduced
legislation
to ensure crucial mid-band spectrum is freed up for commercial use.
Wireless technology analyst Peter Rysavy pointed out in a
conversation with me that 3.45 to 3.55 GHz is only 100 megahertz, which
represents just 14 percent of mid-band spectrum. He said a new
government-controlled network based on this spectrum would simply not have
enough capacity to make a difference. So why take it out of the commercial
market and keep it at the DoD? Rysavy noted that extensive analysis has already
been done by the DoD and the Department of Commerce’s National Telecommunications
and Information Administration to ensure the 3.45 to 3.55 GHz spectrum can be
made available to the industry with minimal restrictions and that considering
any other use for this specific frequency would undermine US 5G capabilities.
America’s mobile operators have made significant investments
in, and are on the path to deploying, 5G networking. Allowing private
investment into mid-band spectrum will help accelerate the shift to
significantly faster and more secure connectivity. The best outcome here would
be continuing down a public policy path that ensures wide-scale deployment of
this spectrum, allowing multiple industries to enjoy the full potential of
next-generation networks and technologies.