PAGE_TITLE: 
	As America Heads Back to School, Let’s Be Careful What We Teach the World | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

The Internet Governance Forum (IGF) is being held next week in Istanbul, Turkey. The IGF has chosen to place net neutrality back on the agenda for a full afternoon discussion by the global attendees. Similar to many other Internet governance issues, “net neutrality”does not have the same definition across the globe.
For example, Brazil recently adopted an Internet Bill of Rights that contains its own definition of “net neutrality.”The Bill of Rights calls for guaranteed civil rights and liberties, protection of privacy, protection of personal data pursuant to the law, freedom of speech, and free expression of thought. Meanwhile, Europe’s version of net neutrality prohibits discrimination, restriction, or interference by a device or service in order to ensure maximum speeds for end users. It also states that providers will be allowed to slow or block Internet access to enforce a court order, preserve network security, or prevent temporary network congestion.
The
recent New York Times editorial
supporting President Obama’s opposition to network management practices is not what we should promote as the United States’ version of “net neutrality.”Even Europe and Brazil knew to place loopholes in their ISP regulations to prevent broadband traffic congestion and allow for reality to flow through their political positioning.
Innovation-stifling regulation has been the bane of many industries; we need to ensure that our legacy in this dialogue does not compromise investment, innovation, and speed. Those commenting on the globally thriving Internet economy need to understand that the foundation of an Open Internet is freedom of expression, not local interconnection agreements.
Transformational technology, innovation, and investment in the Internet economy add to growth in a positive way in every part of the globe. These investments and innovations have spurred application development and a sharing economy that both create better information flow and analytics for better businesses practices, better personal decisions, and better use of scarce time and resources.
We need to make sure we are encouraging individuals and industries to embrace these opportunities and support all levels of innovation on the Internet. We also need to encourage infrastructure providers to continue building and protecting a safe and secure network so that the world can enjoy sustained opportunity and information sharing. Let’s show the world the United States will continue to be a leader in Internet governance by incentivizing a strong, robust Internet infrastructure, which will, in turn, ensure freedom of expression, unfettered communication, opportunities in education, and the power to enhance commerce at every level. These outcomes are the result of innovation, not regulation.
This post was originally published on TechPolicyDaily.