PAGE_TITLE: 
	Event Recap: Who Governs the Internet? | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

During yesterday’s morning discussion on “
Who governs the Internet
,”Ambassador Daniel Sepulveda noted that “The Internet is a platform for the creation and distribution of wealth.”If anyone knows this, it is Ambassador Sepulveda, who through his role as Deputy Assistant Secretary of State and US Coordinator for International Communications and Information Policy actively engages with government officials from all over the world – all of whom seem to have a keen understanding that the Internet brings innovation and creativity that benefit individuals, civil society, and local economies.
This universal understanding of the benefits of the Internet is good news seeing as we’ve heard quite a bit lately about challenges the Internet has brought to the diplomatic table
; countries pushing for data localization, raising privacy concerns, blocking social networks, and trying to keep up in the fight against cybercrime.
The Internet governance landscape has entered a period of transformation. As pointed out by ICANN Chairman Steve Crocker, technological change is continuously testing the boundaries of organizational and political assumptions, and the policy framework must adjust. But even in this period of upheaval, it is not completely clear why Internet governance – a relatively technical and bureaucratic issue – should be receiving as much attention as it has recently. American University professor and author Laura DeNardis said it best: “Arrangements of technical architecture are always arrangements of power.”Perhaps the public is realizing that there is an awful lot of power in those Internet connections?
The increased attention paid to Internet governance also helps explain the uproar that followed the announcement from NTIA Assistant Secretary Larry Strickling regarding the transition of a little known technical function administered by the Department of Commerce; the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) function. All of a sudden, Assistant Secretary Strickling found himself explaining and re-explaining the transition to several Congressional committees, all with a new-found interest in IANA, ICANN, and Internet governance in general.
Strickling’s
remarks
at AEI yesterday can be summarized as follows: “we heard you and we agree.”In his comments he laid out the rules of the IANA transition: the transition must follow a plan developed by the multi-stakeholder community; it must ensure the uninterrupted and stable functioning of the Internet, as well as its current openness; no government-led or intergovernmental solution is acceptable; the proposal must maintain the security, stability, and resiliency of the domain name system; and the plan must meet the needs and expectations of the global customers and partners of the IANA services.
As it currently stands, the details of the IANA transition are still in flux. Yesterday, former Ambassador David Gross warned that the potential for capture of the Internet planning process by governments or intergovernmental organizations is a very real possibility. Steve DelBianco of NetChoice noted continued concern about the rules for the transition as he encouraged more involvement by all stakeholders in the Internet governance planning process. DelBianco stressed that involvement by all interested parties is especially important to the accountability and transparency coordination that ICANN has agreed must take place before the IANA transition happens. He also highlighted the need to “future proof”ICANN by designing stronger by-laws that reinforce the US legal structure of the ICANN contracting process, and by encouraging the IANA Stewardship Transition Coordination group to “stress test”the proposed IANA structure.
The lesson of the day to those interested in Internet freedom is to put down your pitchfork and participate in the process.
This post was originally published on TechPolicyDaily.