PAGE_TITLE: 
	Crossing the Consumer Welfare Rubicon: A Conversation with Commissioner Noah Phillips of the Federal Trade Commission | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

VIDEO
Event Summary
On July 18, Commissioner Noah Phillips of the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) joined AEI’s Shane Tews to discuss how the FTC is handling antitrust enforcement under Chairwoman Lina Khan’s leadership.
Mr. Phillips reiterated that the FTC’s mandate is to protect competition. Yet the FTC leadership’s current view of antitrust champions a government-controlled economy under the guise of promoting competition. Ms. Khan’s underlying view that “big is bad” is resulting in inconsistent and problematic approaches to key cases, along with disrupting internal agency processes.
Mr. Phillips highlighted how the FTC has been removing merger guidance without properly replacing it, leaving American companies in the dark. More generally, a growing lack of clarity on how the FTC wants to regulate hampers innovation and puts the US at a global disadvantage. Additionally, the focus on only a small group of technology firms for strict enforcement is arbitrary and further damages the FTC’s credibility.
Ms. Tews and Mr. Phillips also discussed how the concept of “self-preferencing” is not novel; it occurs across several sectors from retail to technology. Mr. Phillips concluded that while competition is the FTC’s main area of concern, competition isn’t nice. It produces both winners and losers.
—Matthew Glavish
Event Description
Major changes are underway at Joe Biden’s Federal Trade Commission (FTC); new leadership proposes to move away from the consumer welfare standard in identifying enforcement-worthy conduct, and merger review policy is changing dramatically. The tech industry is also facing particularly heavy scrutiny. What will these changes mean for consumers, American innovation, and day-to-day affairs at the FTC?
Join AEI’s Shane Tews for a one-on-one conversation with FTC Commissioner Noah Phillips on the causes for and implications of the commission’s new path away from consumer welfare. An audience Q&A session will follow.
Event Material
Event Transcript