PAGE_TITLE: 
	How to Engineer Better Data Governance: Highlights from My Conversation with Nishant Bhajaria | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

By Shane Tews
Efforts to
legislate data protection (or “privacy”) have become a priority in the US and
Europe. But the real issue at hand is data governance — namely the collection,
storage, and deletion of data that companies collect about customers. These
companies now face a patchwork of potential legislation to regulate data access
and retention. But what if engineers and corporate leaders could work together
to limit data collection risks before their products come to market? And what
if privacy protections evolved to meet consumer preferences around information
gathering and sharing by both companies and third-party vendors? Would there be
more understanding of how the information is used and less concern over the
security of the data retained by these companies?
Nishant Bhajaria
, Uber’s head of technical privacy and governance, joined “Explain to Shane” to discuss his upcoming book,
Privacy Engineering
, which will offer a roadmap for company executives and engineers looking to equip their products with greater built-in privacy protections while increasing transparency and accountability for users.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of our talk. You can listen to this and other episodes of “Explain to Shane” on
AEI.org
and subscribe via your
preferred listening platform
. You can also read the full transcript of our discussion
here
. If you enjoyed this episode, leave us a review, and tell your friends and colleagues to tune in.
Shane Tews: Nishant, your upcoming book, Privacy
Engineering, focuses on designing technical privacy solutions for business
applications of software systems. What inspired you to write it?
Nishant
Bhajaria: When engineers build tools every day, there’s a lot of segmentation
of how work actually happens in companies. There’s internet segmentation and
there’s actual service segmentation in which an engineer aide does stuff with
data, services, and infrastructure that the head engineers have no awareness
of. When combined, the work of both parties creates risks companies cannot
prepare for. It creates opportunities for bad actors inside and outside the
company.
So how do
you, at a technical tooling level, address those risks? You either do them
right from the get-go or you play catch-up forever. This book is aimed primarily
at those engineers so they have the tooling and understanding to do things
right from the get-go. My second audience is the executives, regulators, folks
in the media, and the folks on Capitol Hill who have taken it upon themselves
to bring this issue to light. How do you make sure people understand all the
dependencies, weaknesses, and complexities of getting this stuff right? How do
you make sure that people, when they pass legislation, understand the moving
parts? The difference in context between the executive regulatory layer and the
engineering layer is too big. And it is to our detriment as a company, as a
country, and as a society.
So my hope
here is to close that gap, and that even people who don’t write code read this
book to understand just what it takes to build these systems.
Did the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA)
inspire your work at all? Did Uber have to do any workarounds when that came
out a few years ago?
My work in
this space predates the CCPA and even Europe’s General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR). Now, I feel like industry is running scared because they have
built up all this data. They were told for a long time, “Collect data, monetize
it, and make your services available and free in a very democratic fashion.” And
now suddenly we’re told to collect data differently without prescriptive
guidance on what to do right. This goes for Uber and all other businesses that
deal with user data.
When I
became a US citizen, I was told that if you forget to submit something
correctly, it’s not the government’s fault. It’s your fault. It’s you, and
you’re supposed to understand immigration law correctly — just me, this little
person here. Now, the entire industry is in the same spot with security and
privacy, so I wrote this book after having built out notes for two years. When
the publisher asked if I wanted to do it about a year ago, I said, “Fine. I
have all this stuff ready to go.”
Then of
course GDPR came in, the CCPA came in, and Apple and Facebook have since come
in with their dialogue about the third-party cookies and user consent. So with my
preparation of over a decade and all the news that keeps on coming with cyberwarfare
and data breaches, there’s been no shortage of material. The challenge has
been: How do I constrain all this within 325 pages?
Talk a bit more about GDPR. Did Uber have
to restructure when GDPR passed?
A lot of
that work was done before I joined the company. But my general guidance is:
Don’t use the GDPR or CCPA as your only beacon. Use those as platforms to build
on, because these laws are not the be-all-end-all. GDPR is not history; it’s a
harbinger in terms of what it means. Even though more and more laws that are
coming up and discussions that are taking place build on the GDPR, my general
sense is: If you are trying to reduce data collection, GDPR doesn’t give you a
way to do that. If you’re trying to delete data intelligently, GDPR doesn’t let
you essentially get a checklist to do that.
My general
approach is that we should collect less data. I have this diagram that I often
show executive members of the board where if you look at the data as a funnel,
you have the narrow end on the left-hand side and the broad end on the
right-hand side. When data enters the company, it grows more and more. And then
when data is collected, people find new uses for the moment. It’s like when you
are in a meeting and think, “Oh, this meeting should take only 10 minutes” and
then you go five minutes over because people find new topics. Data is like
that.
So my
general guidance, whether I’m at Uber or any other company for that matter, is:
Let’s make sure we collect what we need to collect. Let’s delete data as soon
as possible, but more importantly, let’s centralize data. The problem with
using GDPR as your only reference is that it tells you things at a
first-principle basis, but your implementation is going to be very, very
company-specific. So this book focuses a lot on tooling, because if you build
out the right tooling, engineers will do the right thing just by design because
it’s baked into the infrastructure. Engineers will do the right thing if you
make it easy for them to do that, and that’s what this book does.
Treat GDPR
as a beginning, use it as a reference point, but don’t assume that just because
you’ve got GDPR done two or three years ago you are somehow done with privacy.
It’s only the beginning.
Apple has unveiled a new program that
notifies users when their information is being collected and used, then lets
them opt out if they desire. What do you think about this?
I think the
Apple conversation is interesting. When I first got into privacy, the typical
use case that popped up was how in the US, the box tends to be pre-checked and
you are considered to be opted-in, then you have to actively opt-out. The
assumption is that fewer people are going to proactively check and uncheck the
box. Of course, on the European side, the box is opted-out and you have to
preemptively check in.
Fast forward
to now, and I don’t know if our customer base has been made aware of the sheer
number of choices and all that happens behind the scenes. And now we’re
suddenly saying, “Here are the options. Tell us what you would have us do.” I
think this might become like GDPR or rather with the “do not sell” option with
the CCPA where people just check it and move on because it’s getting too
exhausting. Because you know, when we open the app as customers, not as
engineers or think tank experts, we’re trying to get somewhere. When you open
Netflix, we are trying to stream something. When we open Amazon, we want to buy
something. The idea of having this extra speed bump is not something we have
been trained to do.
So I don’t
know if the debate is something that’s going to necessarily have the customers
front and center. My general sense is that when you make a change on privacy or
security, the ultimate filter is: Is it going to benefit the customers? And I’m
not sure if the customers — the users, in this case — have enough context to
really make the most informed decisions. I’m just not sure if the regular
customers understand the complexity of the debate and will be better off
regardless of where we end up.
This has been a great conversation. When is
your book coming out?
The book
should be out next month. We are going through final edits as we speak; I’m
getting these podcasts ready so that they line up with the book’s release. I’ve
gotten a ton of feedback from engineers, and it’s already available on presale,
so the link is available to everyone.