PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Politics of Internet Domain Names and the Case of .amazon | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

The Internet Corporation on Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) begins its 60th meeting in Abu Dhabi next week. One hot-button topic sure to be discussed is how governments and the internet community manage new top level domains (TLDs) when there are conflicting points of view. ICANN’s original mission was to manage the technical coordination of generic top-level domains such as .com, .net, and .org, the unique identifiers that direct traffic on the internet through the domain name system (DNS). But however limited ICANN’s actual mission may be on paper, it has since become the place for internet governance issues to be addressed and a place for the internet community and governments to work together.
Via REUTERS
With the adoption of the new TLD process by the ICANN board in 2012, those who want TLDs for specific interests, such as representing a community, a hobby, or brand promotion (and brand protection), could have a more descriptive domain name. Domain names such as .golf, .tech, .data, .Boston, and .dell make it easier for internet users to find information relevant to their interests in a crowded field of generic legacy domains that have been used since the beginning of the DNS. New TLDs also allow specific industries and corporations to have more technical control over their internet presences, with dedicated domain name servers specific to their names or interests that can help protect their domain name traffic.
These new domain name extensions can improve security for their users by creating dedicated platforms away from the larger technical operators who manage billions of internet lookups on their systems. Remember the Dyn cyberattack a year ago? DNS traffic was disrupted on major websites including Amazon, Netflix, Twitter, and others. These types of attacks are successful because third parties such as Dyn are coordinating the look-up traffic flow for major internet companies.
Amazon recognized the significance of this development when ICANN introduced the new TLD process. Having a .amazon domain name would give them a front door on the internet, rather than having to use another company’s generic entrance to direct traffic to their online location. Moving to a .amazon domain name would have several benefits. By routing its own internet traffic, the company would control the pathway to its online home. Using the most direct path available on the internet would also improve security for customers — and the company would gain the ability to provide a new technical space for innovation because its entrance platform is no longer controlled by an outside company that directs internet traffic as its business.
At the upcoming ICANN 60 meeting, a major discussion topic will be the reconsideration of Amazon’s 2013 application for the new TLD, .amazon. At the time, the company noted they were interested in promoting and protecting their brand and using the domain name system as part of a brand strategy that would allow them more control over their web traffic. Other companies looking to promote the new TLDs were excited about Amazon’s dedication to the new TLD process, as it would help drive awareness to the new alternative endings to domain names other than the legacy .com, .net, and .org names internet users are accustomed to. Amazon spent years coordinating and collaborating with the ICANN community on creating the new TLD process and its guidebook for applications to ensure their interest fell within the guidelines of the new TLD program.
Amazon’s collaboration with the internet community in creating the new TLD program came to a halt in 2013 when Peru and Brazil leveraged their positions in ICANN’s Government Advisory Committee to place a hold on the application. The US initially stood up for Amazon against the arguments the Peruvian and Brazilian representatives put forward. These two countries objected to .amazon, claiming there would be harm to the local community. The US noted there is not an Amazon internet community specifically located in Brazil and Peru as required for a “community application” in the new TLD application, according to the adopted guidebook.
Amazon engaged heavily in the ICANN’s new TLD process and met every criterion in the application guidebook created by the entire ICANN community. The corporation also pointed out it has the trademark rights to its name and that there are no international laws that interfere with Amazon using its trademark rights in the domain name process.
In July 2013, the US government reversed its objection, changing its position on the .amazon application to neutral and allowing a parliamentary move by the GAC to say they had a “consensus objection” to the .amazon string. The .amazon application was blocked from moving forward as a new TLD.
A contentious, years-long review process of this application was brought to a head in July 2017, when a panel came back with a determination that the ICANN board “failed in its duty to explain and give adequate reasons” for its decision to block the .amazon application. After four years of legal wrangling, Amazon can now move forward with the new TLD application through the ICANN process. But a larger question still looms: When do governments have a veto over the internet community?
Amazon followed the rules, and there are no international laws that prohibit the use of .amazon. However, the governments of Brazil and Peru continue to push their objection within the ICANN community on the .amazon application, claiming it’s not in the public interest as it may damage the countries in the Amazon region.
Amazon is undertaking a responsibility that more companies should take in this era of cybersecurity challenges — they are looking to define and protect their internet identity through the DNS’s tools. Allowing a company that holds a major internet presence to control their domain name has been a major reason for the new TLD program from the beginning. A top-level domain name’s ability to enhance the user experience with quick identification and the ability to add additional security are keys to the new TLD program. The internet community sees the .amazon application as a case study in what they can and cannot do without government permission. If the US government wants to stand for principles it has set out in the past for a free and unfettered internet, now is the time to speak up.