PAGE_TITLE: 
	Coronavirus, 5G, and the Restoring Internet Freedom Order: Highlights from My Conversation with Joel Thayer | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

How is the Federal Communications Commission responding to the coronavirus pandemic? What is Ligado and why is it controversial? And what does the
Restoring Internet Freedom Order
mean for the future of the web? Joel Thayer, an attorney at Phillips Lytle and an expert on telecommunications, regulatory and transaction matters, privacy, and cybersecurity, joined me on the latest episode of “Explain to Shane” to discuss these questions and more.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of our talk. You can listen to the podcast
here
and read our full discussion
here
. You can also subscribe to the “Explain to Shane” podcast on
iTunes
or
Stitcher
, or download the podcast on
Ricochet
.
Shane Tews: Joel, welcome. Let’s start with what’s going
on with the FCC and COVID? What temporary regulations have they been changing
that hopefully been making broadband easier for American citizens?
Joel Thayer: The FCC has taken what I feel is a leadership
role in this area. And they’ve done three key things that I think are important
to help out in this time of crisis. The three things are as follows: One, they
had carriers take a Keep America Connected pledge, which we’ll go into in a
little bit. Secondly, they opened up a lot of spectrum to augment our Wi-Fi
footprint and increase capabilities, especially for wireless internet service
providers or WISPs. Lastly, they implemented a lot of subsidy programs that
have been focused primarily on telehealth capabilities and also connected
education. So they’re doing a lot.
They, in conjunction with industry, I think have positioned
us very well to increase our abilities in the broadband space. It’s traditional
carriers, such as Verizon and AT&T, and even fiber optic cable operators,
are part of the list. I’m not entirely sure, but I’m almost certain it is. Specifically
it’s targeted at wireless internet service providers, which are called WISPs.
WISPs are primarily based in rural areas and rely heavily on spectrum in order
to provide internet-based services for those who live in middle America, and
enter any small rural town here. So it’s critical for them to access the
spectrum that allows them to augment their services.
Another thing that the FCC has done, on top of the pledge, is
to open up spectrum for Wi-Fi capabilities. And specifically, there are two
items that the FCC has promulgated that has really pushed us forward in that
regard. One is the 6 GHz proceeding. 6 GHz, it’s just basically radio frequency
spectrum that wasn’t traditionally used for Wi-Fi, but through a lot of
extensive research and also testing, and also previous usage, the FCC has
identified this spectrum frequency as a key element to increasing our Wi-Fi
footprint.
Spectrum basically is, think of it more like a layered cake.
And the next layer right underneath 6 GHz is the 5.9 gigahertz band. And the
5.9 GHz band, it was traditionally used for auto manufacturers to provide
public safety capabilities. Which arguably hasn’t been used, but in this
instance, the FCC has temporarily allowed it to be used, the 5.9 GHz band, to
make a more contiguous Wi-Fi spectrum frequency. And contiguous just means that
now it goes from using one layer of the cake to using a larger portion of the
cake, to just enjoy for Wi-Fi purposes.
Now that these things are temporary, are they able to
make them permanent? What do they have to do about that?
The 6 GHz proceeding that I mentioned earlier is an order
and that rule is here to stay. 5.9, however, is still in regulatory limbo. What
the FCC has to do, is move on what’s called a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking
[NPRM]. And just to give you a very quick briefer on FCC proceedings: The FCC
has to, in order for them to promulgate a rule with the effect of law, first
give the public enough notice. That would meet their statutory obligations
under what’s called the Administrative Procedures Act. And it would also meet
our overall constitutional view of due process. Due process means that if the
government is doing anything that could potentially affect our rights, they
have to give us notice. So the FCC does this first. They will first put out
what’s called a Notice of Inquiry, where they’ll say, “Hey, world, we want
to move on these items. What say you? What can we do? Do you think that we have
statutory authority?” And they seek comment on it through a certain period
of time.
After that, assuming everything is kosher, they move to the
next stage, which is a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, where it’s a more
articulated proceeding. So basically they say, “Look. Given all your input
from the Notice of Inquiry, we think that this would be a good-looking rule. Do
you guys agree that it’s good-looking? If not, tell us why it’s not, and we
will take that comment and then we will potentially create an order or a rule
out of that proceeding.” Which ultimately results in a final order or
rule.
For the 5.9 proceeding, we’re in the middle part. We’re
still in the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking area. And I believe that comments
have just closed, either a week or two weeks ago. The next stage for the FCC to
move to make this use a little bit more permanent, is to now move on to
creating an order.
So for now, it’s temporary, but once the FCC moves on its
previous NPRM, the rule will be here to stay. But it has to move on this rule
before it becomes anything less than temporary.
In the middle of all this, there’s an issue that has been
out there for many years, this company Ligado. What is Ligado and what are they
up to?
Ligado has sort of a tortured history. Ligado was formerly
called LightSquared. And what LightSquared essentially did, was provide
satellite-based services in a very specific frequency, using a very specific
type of spectrum called L-band. L-band is traditionally used for GPS purposes,
and is used by a wide variety of stakeholders, both governmental and private
industry, such as John Deere or Garmin. Anyone who is in the GPS space uses
spectrum frequencies in or around L band. So LightSquared realized that,
“Hey, this is actually a pretty valuable spectrum to provide other
services that are also beneficial, such as broadband.”
Circa 2004, they petitioned the FCC to modify its license,
its spectrum license. For the uninitiated, in order for a carrier like Ligado
or Verizon or anyone to provide services using specific frequencies, they have
to go and buy that particular frequency through an auction that the FCC holds,
usually. So Ligado, formerly LightSquared, bought specific frequencies within L
band and said, “Hey, you have a license to provide satellite services that
does X, Y, and Z.” That X, Y, and Z aspects of their license did not include
providing broadband services.
Ligado said, “All right, well, we think that we have
enough capabilities to provide broadband services. So let’s go and let’s modify
our license.” In order to do that, you need the FCC to give a blessing. In
order for you to get the FCC blessing, it is incredibly hard to do. It requires
an immense amount of thought behind it. It requires a lot of inter-agency work
to make sure that you’re not offending incumbents, which are other people who
are currently using the band, and even the band around it.
Final and not a small topic, the Restoring Internet
Freedom Order and the comments. Some people still refer to this as net
neutrality, which I don’t because I think that it’s something that’s way past
its prime. It might’ve made sense in the early 2000s, but it just keeps
bringing its ugly head back up. So what just happened April 20th? I know there
were comments, and then we had reply comments on May 20th. Can you just break
that down for us a little bit and what the key issues were?
Ultimately this is a question from the DC circuit, or a
request from the DC circuit, that the FCC, pursuant to a lawsuit called Mozilla
v. FCC, explain how its changing classification of broadband services – going
from a telecommunication service, which was done in 2015 to its reversion back,
through the Restoring Internet Freedom order, which happened in 2018 – how that
would affect some other policies.
Title I versus Title II. Information services have been
what broadband has been for a long time. It just was how these zeros and ones
flow. And then certain people thought that it needs to be treated more like an
old-fashioned telecom carrier. Is that correct?
That’s absolutely right. So it goes back to, firstly, I was
going to say, what is net neutrality? That’s basically the, this conversation
is just an extension of that conversation. And net neutrality at its highest of
high levels, is how the internet should be regulated from the perspective of
the Federal Communications Commission. Or at least it’s devolved into that kind
of conversation.

The FCC also recognized that, “Hey, the Internet
has been running on a Title I free market regime since the dawn of the
worldwide web. We should be encouraging that because we saw spurs of investment
as a result of keeping it in the free market. The Internet was not broken to
begin with. Why are we over-regulating something that is clearly working?” So
the Restoring Internet Freedom Order really just brings the Internet back to
what it always has been, which is back to the regulatory family it’s always
fallen under, which is a Title I information service.