PAGE_TITLE: 
	The FBI Overstated the ‘going Dark’ Problem, and the Facts on Encryption Remain the Same | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

In 2016, FBI Director James Comey testified twice before Congress regarding concerns that new technology was allowing criminals to “go dark” — that the use of encryption was making it difficult for law enforcement agencies to access evidence. The FBI used its investigation into the 2015 San Bernardino terror attack to highlight its desire for “backdoor” access to encrypted technologies, as the bureau was unable to access the iPhone owned by one of the attackers, Syed Rizwan Farook. The evidence that needed to show Farook and Tashfeen Malik had planned and executed the attack that killed 14 and injured 22 more was protected by the unbreakable encryption on the iPhone, according to Comey’s testimony.
The FBI seal and motto are seen at of the J. Edgar Hoover Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Building in Washington, US, REUTERS.
The FBI requested that Apple assist in its efforts to break into the phone, and the subsequent court order and the FBI’s public battle with the company generated headlines. Since this public demand for encryption-breaking tools by law enforcement, there have been persistent questions about whether the FBI had exhausted all its legitimate options for recovering data from this crime scene. Or was it easier to ask the court for special access from the device manufacturer to gain access to the device, rather than go through the internal technical operations needed to retrieve the desired information?
A recent
report
by the Department of Justice’s Office of the Inspector General states that the FBI didn’t use all the technical tools at its disposal, both with its own internal experts or from third-party vendors before rushing Apple into court to accuse it of being part of the “going dark” problem. The FBI’s legal battle with Apple became a poster child for the “going dark” challenge and became a priority for Comey and many others at the FBI.
This debate harkens back to the debate over the
Clipper Chip
in the 1990s, when the US government considered and ultimately rejected proposals that there be two separate keys to each electronic device’s encryption code — one set for authorized agencies approved by the attorney general. It also raises the question of how government can want to help us keep our data sequestered through cumbersome privacy regulations on one hand, while also desiring broad-access encrypted communications on the other.
More encryption has become a key offering for many smartphone manufacturers due in part to the public outcry over the Snowden disclosures. Apple’s creation of a new operating system that has both a passcode-protected entry (and now offers facial recognition security) and allows for the encryption of device data was a response to their customer base wanting enhanced device security.
The DOJ’s inspector general concluded in its report on the San Bernardino case that the FBI’s own internal communications issues with its Operational Technology Division caused miscommunications and a lack of understanding of the FBI’s capabilities that could have helped access the data on the iPhone taken from the San Bernardino crime scene. The report notes that searching for all possible solutions to gain access to the device had just begun when the FBI demanded from Apple necessary and appropriate aid in its search for criminal evidence. Since the FBI has noted its internal communication issues, the government — understanding the capabilities within the agency to recover evidence — has withdrawn its previous statements that it could not access the data. The FBI had also
dropped
its legal demands for a backdoor to one of Apple’s products.
According to a recent Washington Post
report
, the FBI had also been grossly exaggerating the scale of the “going dark” problem. The FBI claimed “investigators were locked out of nearly 7,800 devices connected to crimes last year when the correct number was much smaller, probably between 1,000 and 2,000.” The FBI recently made public that it was using three separate databases that led to the conflated number, most likely due to double or triple counting the number of locked devices in criminal cases.
Civil society advocates are concerned about the government pursuing a “crypto war.” The continued failures of law enforcement to execute on accurate information are going to be the undoing of any trust the American public has in giving authorities the leeway they want to solve criminal cases in the era of advanced technology. In 2015, some of the preeminent national security leaders in the US, Mike McConnell (former NSA director and director of national intelligence), Michael Chertoff (former homeland security secretary), and William Lynn (former deputy defense secretary)
urged
that government embrace ubiquitous encryption, saying it “provides essential security . . . [and] if law enforcement and intelligence organizations face a future without assured access to encrypted communications, they will develop technologies and techniques to meet their legitimate mission goals.”
They’re right. Once manufacturers grant any form of request for an encryption backdoor, we are all more vulnerable, not just to government surveillance but also to scammers, phishing, cyber criminals, and clever individuals who know how to manipulate the backdoor to compromise security. The right to privacy is accompanied by the ability to encrypt information for the individual user. These don’t have to be conflicting goals in our legal system.