PAGE_TITLE: 
	Data Protection, Privacy, and AI Ethics: Highlights from My Conversation with Christina Montgomery | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Enabling data to flow between enterprise divisions and
industry partners enhances our economy. But when the information being shared
is about individuals, protecting user privacy is key. Data transfers are thus a
major topic in tech policy, especially as newer products employ artificial
intelligence (AI) to collect and transfer user data. If the US were to pass a
federal data protection or privacy law, what AI-related measures would need to
be included? How can we regulate AI in a precise manner that protects
innovation?
I recently hosted IBM’s Chief Privacy Officer and AI Ethics Board Co-Chair
Christina Montgomery
on “Explain to Shane” to discuss how IBM is crafting its newest technologies — including AI — to handle consumer data in an ethical manner, and why the company supports “precision regulation” of AI. We also discussed where these priorities rank in IBM’s recent
letter to the Biden administration
.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of our talk. You can listen to this and other episodes of “Explain to Shane” on
AEI.org
and subscribe via your
preferred listening platform
. You can also read the full transcript of our discussion
here
. If you enjoyed this episode, leave us a review, and tell your friends and colleagues to tune in.
Shane Tews: IBM has
made commitments related to ethics, privacy, and security around not only your
AI products, but all of your endeavors across the world. Can you walk us
through what these commitments mean?
Christina Montgomery: This is a critical topic for us because
we’ve been earning the trust of society and our clients for more than a
century. We really embrace our obligation to be trusted stewards of technology.
We’ve responsibly managed users’ most valuable data and worked to earn their
trust by ushering in powerful new technologies with clear and constructive
purposes. That’s sort of our mantra here: While technology — including AI —
makes our lives easier and more convenient, there are legitimate concerns about
privacy, safety, and fairness to address.
The purpose of AI is to augment, not replace, human
intelligence. We’ve been very clear on that point for a number of years now:
that data and insights belong to their creator and that new technologies
including AI have to be deployed in a transparent and explainable way.
These principles are easy to understand, but they’re not
always as easy to put into practice. You have to put mechanisms in place to
live up to them. So we’ve been advancing things like AI fact sheets, which are
like ingredients lists or nutrition labels for AI, so to speak. They provide
critical information for AI users about the technology’s purpose and
performance, along with the data sets that went into training the AI and its characteristics
around things like bias and explainability.
How do potential ethical problems get raised to a high enough level
within the company for you all to address? Once they’re in front of you, how do
you solve them?
A good example of this would be
probably in the context of COVID-19. At the beginning of the pandemic, we had a
lot of well-meaning folks within IBM, and we wanted to work with clients and
governments to ensure we were applying technology and expertise in ways that
could make a meaningful difference. So we started looking at: How can we do
that while still focusing on the promise of responsible technology? Because
without trust, society may not embrace technologies that could help address the
pandemic.
We had folks throughout the
business — not just at the top — preemptively looking at and exploring
solutions like contact tracing and exposure notification technologies, fever
detection tools, solutions that can manage and monitor social distancing, and
health passports. And so we took our principles at that time a step further and
adopted firm guardrails — which we published externally — that dictate how we
would and would not apply technology in response to the public health emergency.
Through the ethics board, we
reviewed these opportunities and came up with limitations that pledged
transparency, data collection limitations in any solutions we deployed, and strong
protections for privacy and security. We also committed to ensuring that the
use of our technology is lawful, fair, inclusive, and non-discriminatory. To
this end, we deployed terms and conditions to be used in any business
opportunity involving COVID-19 technology to ensure that we weren’t just
talking about this guidance, but also incorporating it into concrete practices.
In a way, I think the pandemic reinforced
the idea that technology solutions can be very helpful, but they have to be
deployed with the highest ethical standards to promote trust without infringing
on privacy and fundamental rights.
Moving on to data protection (commonly confused with privacy — not
quite the same thing), laws like the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) and
Europe’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)  have forced some major changes in how data is
processed and retained. Have these laws influenced your product development and
how you’re working with your clients?
Absolutely. For any company
that’s operating on a global scale, they would absolutely have to. To back up,
we’ve been at the forefront of privacy and responsible data stewardship at IBM
for decades. Just last week, we celebrated 20 years of having somebody in my
role as chief privacy officer at IBM. We were the first company in our industry
to appoint one, and our data responsibility principles predate the trust and
transparency principles I mentioned earlier.
But legislation like the GDPR and
CCPA has had companies like us scale up our already-strong privacy focus to a
global level. We’ve moved beyond compliance to deeply embedding privacy within
our business strategy to essentially be proactive and strategic around privacy,
and to look at the broader lens of: It’s not just about privacy, it’s really
about data. And so we take an integrated approach to data that I think
positions us well for a world in which data is increasingly a source of both
value and risk. And technology is advancing so quickly that sometimes
regulation can’t necessarily keep up — or at least there’s a perception of
that.
What we have done at IBM
differentiates us across both dimensions of privacy and tech ethics. My team’s
work has gone beyond just our legal functions; we were well-integrated into the
business, hand-in-hand with our chief data office, our security business unit,
our legal team, and our policy team, because we recognize this issue is bigger.
It’s really about data and the risks associated with it, so we want to
understand, across the company, what data we have, where it is, and how to
unlock value for it, all while ensuring compliance with regulations and protecting
our data from adversarial attack, reputational attack, and the like.
Do you think this could be the year in which we finally see a federal
privacy law?
I don’t know, but I do know there’s
a lot of discussion and seemingly bipartisan agreement that a law is needed.
The question becomes whether that happens in the next year, but we’ve been
clear for a long time now: We strongly support national legislation to protect
consumer privacy. We’ve actively been encouraging Congress to make this a
priority and we hope that it happens this year. We need a framework that
provides strong data privacy protections for all and builds consumer trust and
confidence.
We think this is essential to a
modern digital economy. States creating their own rules in the absence of a
federal law creates a regulatory patchwork that is very difficult to navigate.
It’s confusing for businesses and, importantly, for consumers who have to
comply with rules that could change depending on the state they live in or the
state from which they access the internet. So we are really strong advocates
for a national law that will provide consistent protections for consumers, hold
companies accountable for protecting consumer data, and establish a stable
policy environment that supports innovation as well.
We think transparency should be
the focus of this. Consumers deserve to know what data is being collected, how
it’s going to be used and shared, how long it’s going to be stored, and the
like. They deserve the right to exert control over their data — meaning the
right to access it, delete it, and opt out of having it collected in the first
place.
It’s also becoming clear that a
national privacy law has to contemplate the need to sunset some data collection
operations, such as those put in place for an emergency like COVID-19, which might
not play an obvious role post-pandemic. I’m hopeful and encouraged, and will
continue to advocate that something does get enacted this year.
IBM’s recent letter to the Biden administration advocates for “precision
regulation” of emerging technologies like AI. What is precision regulation, the
way you define it?
AI is ubiquitous today. It
touches all of us, and — absent regulation — there is a risk that AI could be
misused. Just look at how some facial recognition technologies have been applied
to mass surveillance, right? But on the other hand, a blanket ban on a
technology could cut society off from the many benefits that AI has to offer —
for example, AI-driven drug discovery technologies that helped vaccine
producers.
So we need to strike the right
balance: one that prioritizes transparency and trustworthiness, pushes
innovation forward, and is cognizant of the ways that technology can be misused.
That’s why we’re advocating for a precision approach that creates ethical
guardrails for the use of new technologies without hindering the pace of
innovation.
What policy developments should we should be watching for from you and
your IBM teammates?
One thing we’re really pushing
for and hoping to see in 2021 is a strengthening of international cooperation
on AI regulatory policy, particularly on initiatives like the National
Institute of Standards and Technology’s (NIST) AI Risk Management Framework. This
was given consideration and guidance in the National Defense Authorization Act,
and it’s a great mechanism for how government, industry, and civil society can
advance a constructive and consensus-based conversation on AI.
AI has recently become a major focus for countries around the globe, so it’s important to continue building on existing international collaborations like the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s AI Policy Observatory, the Global Partnership on AI, and then new initiatives like NIST’s.  Across the world, we have such a patchwork in terms of privacy. It would be great to see more uniformity around frameworks to address AI, so that’s an area we’ll be active in this year.