PAGE_TITLE: 
	Extending US Leadership on 5G: Highlights from a Conversation with FCC Commissioner Brendan Carr | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

By Shane Tews
During a March 15 AEI
web event
, Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Commissioner Brendan Carr emphasized the need to continue advancing US leadership in 5G. He highlighted the importance of the FCC’s recent work on making more spectrum available to commercial markets, and on continuing infrastructure buildouts for next-generation networks. Going forward, he recommended the FCC continue holding commercial spectrum auctions, enable further buildout of 5G infrastructure, and strengthen America’s 5G workforce with training and educational opportunities.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of key highlights from our discussion, including excerpts of Carr’s remarks before our conversation. You can view the full event on
AEI.org
and read the full transcript
here
.
Carr on the success
of light-touch regulation
:
Just a few short years ago, we were at serious risk of ceding US leadership in 5G to our overseas competitors. We were in jeopardy of losing the good-paying jobs and the trillions of dollars in economic growth that come with a first-mover advantage. On the infrastructure side, it took too long and cost too much for US providers to build the hundreds of thousands of new cell sites needed for 5G. . . . What it was taking us four years to do, China was doing every nine days.
Some people argued that we needed to be like China to beat China. They said we needed to nationalize the wireless networks or heavily regulate our way forward. Instead, we bet on America’s free enterprise system, and we went with a tried-and-true playbook: freeing up more spectrum and modernizing our infrastructure rules.
Carr on spectrum
auctions
:
We knew that 5G would be delivered over every spectrum band, so we pursued an all-of-the-above strategy. On high band, we launched the world’s first 5G spectrum auction in 2018 and went on to hold several more, bringing thousands of megahertz (MHz) of spectrum to market. On low band, we completed the transition work needed to free up 600 MHz, in addition to modifying the rules for the 800-MHz and 900-MHz bands to enable more high-speed builds. On mid-band, we held the first auction of mid-band spectrum in 2020 with 70 MHz worth of spectrum in the 3.5-gigahertz (GHz) band. At 2.5 GHz, we transformed the rules governing nearly 200 MHz worth of this mid-band spectrum to support 5G, and teed up over 100 MHz for auction. At 4.9 GHz, we modernized the regulation of a 50-MHz swath of spectrum.
In the L-band, we authorized 30 MHz of spectrum for 5G in Internet of Things. At 5.9 GHz, we opened up 45 MHz for unlicensed, plus we pushed out an additional 1,200 MHz of unlicensed in the 6-GHz band. [With] C-band . . . we cleared 280 MHz of this sought-after mid-band spectrum. All told, our spectrum efforts over the past four years opened up more than 6 GHz of spectrum for licensed 5G services, in addition to thousands of MHz of unlicensed spectrum.
Carr on 5G
infrastructure
:
Infrastructure builds accelerated at a record pace over the last four years . . . [and] those new builds are paying off for the American consumer. Internet speeds in the US have more than tripled over the last four years — far outpacing the increases seen in other countries. Indeed, the US leapfrogged ahead of 20 countries on the global mobile speed rankings over that same period of time. Competition has increased too, with the percentage of Americans with more than two options for high-speed service jumping by more than 52 percent between 2016 and 2018 alone. Prices are down, and [the] digital divide has been cut nearly in half since 2016. . . . On top of this, we flipped the script on 5G. Americans should be proud that we now have the world’s leading 5G platform.
Shane Tews: Do you
anticipate the FCC will need to free up more mobile spectrum for 5G moving
forward?
Brendan Carr: Yes. I’ve called for us to hold an auction on
the 2.5-GHz band this year, and there are steps we can take in the 3.5-GHz
band, 6-GHz band, and beyond. We’re in a lot better shape than we were a couple
years ago, but we don’t have enough mid-band spectrum just yet.
The good news is: So much of that legwork is done. We have
spectrum in the cupboard. There’s work that remains, but the key now is to just
get this spectrum out. And so I think we should put out a spectrum calendar
that shows which bands we’re going to move forward with, in what order. That
would provide some certainty to the public and give us something to work
towards internally.
Also, if we can get 5G terrestrial use in the 12-GHz band,
this new generation of low-Earth orbit satellites will have lots of
public-interest benefits. I’m excited about a lot of what we’re seeing from these
satellites; I think they could be a key part of closing the digital divide,
particularly when you look at the most expensive, hardest-to-serve, 1–2 percent
of the country.
Moving to the topic
of jobs, tell us what the FCC has been up to.
Ultimately, we need more telecom crews to complete 5G
builds. I’ve spent a lot of time outside of DC in this job — not just with tower
techs, but with the women and men that are pulling and splicing fiber. They
tell me they want to double their crews, and that they’re having to turn down
work because they don’t have enough trained telecom techs.
I think we need to do more to help make this happen. Doing
so will not just accelerate internet builds; it will also create thousands of
good-paying jobs. Some of it can be through apprenticeships like the Department
of Labor’s Telecommunications Industry Registered Apprenticeship Program, but
we also need to focus on vocational training programs at community colleges.
We’ve made progress on that front, and there are several in the works that I’m
working directly with.
I’ve also been working and engaging directly with a number
of trade schools who have already seen tower tech training programs launch in
South Carolina, South Dakota, North Dakota, and Oklahoma. Earlier this month, I
was in Mississippi to work on standing up another tower training program there.
So, as we move forward at the federal level, we should be mindful of
opportunities to expand the 5G workforce.
What is the FCC’s
point of view on open radio access networks (O-RAN)? How is that going?
We’re pretty excited about O-RAN. It gives America’s
companies a chance to compete in the infrastructure space, whereas before, you
needed billions and billions of dollars of R&D to enter and compete in the
hardware space. But now, when you separate the hardware from the software layer
as O-RAN does, you’re competing on software, which is easier for a lot of US
companies to compete in. So I think it’s good in terms of leveling the playing
field for competition. I think it gives us a lot more network security as well,
in part because you have a lot more options for the network gear. It’s going to
be a more efficient build in the long run, which should help drive down costs
as well.
I think it’s interesting to watch the different headlines on
it play out, because some of the incumbent equipment vendors are differently
situated on O-RAN — whether it’s good for them in the short run or long run.
But I think we’re doing the right thing at the FCC, which is being supportive
of the trend, seeing if there’s stuff that we can do to help accelerate it, and
letting the private sector figure it out from there.
Do you think we’re
finally ready to move on from net neutrality, or are we going back to that
battle?
There’s a lot that has changed in the relatively short time
since we last went down the misguided Title II net neutrality path in
2015–2016. One difference is: We’re now in the world of 5G. And in all of the really
interesting use cases and applications that can come from 5G, there are
certainly versions of Title II net neutrality that don’t seem to be consistent
with pro-consumer, competitive 5G applications. And so I do have some concerns
— among other things — that if you go back down that path, you may bless an
individual 5G use case or something while casting doubt over other beneficial
cases.
The political and technical dynamics of networks are also very
different today. Back in 2015–2016, people said the greatest threat to a free
and open internet was the mom-and-pop ISP in Iowa that needed the heaviest of
heavy-handed regulations in the form of Title II to keep a free and open
internet. Flash forward to today: The choke points are in a very different
position. And it’s not just when we look at the edge of the network and the
social media applications. It even is starting to move down the stack, and you
can now see that infrastructure-side providers are the ones who are currently
taking or have taken action to prevent the free flow of information.
So ISPs, in the absence of Title II, have not been engaging
in the type of conduct that people say requires Title II, but on the other
hand, you’ve got these other infrastructure and edge providers that are engaging
in that type of conduct. I think it’s a very different scenario to try to move
forward with a heavy-handed, ISP-only approach.
My view is that what we’re doing is undeniably working.
COVID-19 was the ultimate stress test. The progress we made with our
light-touch approach brought thousands of families across the digital divide
before COVID hit so they had access to the internet. And those people on the
internet had a far better experience than our international counterparts in
terms of speeds and performance because of our approach to network regulation.
We are seeing providers invest double their counterparts in Europe, for
instance, because of our framework.
So to somehow turn around and say we need to single out ISPs for heavy internet regulation based on things that are actually going on in
other
parts of the infrastructure or the edge is a much more difficult argument both to make, but also to sustain, I think, on appeal in terms of the arbitrary nature of an FCC decision. I also think the Supreme Court would potentially look very skeptically — more so today than ever — on this type of approach.