PAGE_TITLE: 
	Happy “Cybersecurity Awareness Month”! Now Go Change Your Passwords. | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

I’m not a fan of the phrase “cyber hygiene,”but it does explain what needs to be done to get to the next level of security for our personal devices and the overall network. Just like humans moved beyond the diseases of the middle ages when better hygiene became more common, we need a good tech-health tool kit to keep our digital existence safe. Inspired by the Center for Internet Security’s enterprise-focused
“Cyber Hygiene Toolkits,”
here are three simple steps individuals can take to improve the security of their own information and make the network more robust for everyone.
Count – Know which networks – and individuals – have access to your digital devices.
Limit who has access when possible.
Maintain a list of who – both individuals and networks – you have given access to. This allows you to revoke access when needed for more control over any vulnerable entry points.
Do not use open wireless networks for any type of activity that involves sensitive information. This includes online banking or shopping, or sending or uploading personal information such as your address or social security number.
Configure – Protect your data through key security settings.
Change your passwords regularly.
Use a password manager that has enhanced encryption.
Don’t use the same password for informal emails and ones that have access to your credit card information.
Control – Take the steps that make hacking your account not worth the effort.
Say yes to updates! These updates include patches to the software that resolve vulnerabilities that have been identified as potential concerns to end-users.
Wipe off your smart phone. This has nothing to do with cyber hygiene – It’s for your offline health.Use the available security tools you already have on your smartphone, computer, and email accounts – including two-factor authentication.
Also remember that if your phone is connected to your employer’s server, everything you do on that device has the opportunity to infiltrate the corporate network if the security of their system is vulnerable. Work with your corporate information technology team to be sure you are aware of and honoring their cybersecurity guidelines. Similarly, when you set up your in-home network, make sure that security is a priority for your network provider.
These three “Cs”are first steps toward protecting yourself and helping to protect the larger network we all depend on as the number one tool for our communications and the number one driver of economic growth, job creation, and commerce. Let’s all get rid of some digital diseases by washing our cyber hands.
This post was originally published on TechPolicyDaily.