PAGE_TITLE: 
	How to Improve Trust and Safety Online: Highlights from My Conversation with Clara Tsao | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Trust is a binding agent for society, but the internet was
not designed with trust or user safety in mind. And today, trust in the online
ecosystem seems to be plummeting. How can we reverse this trend?
Many tech companies have trust and safety professionals working behind the scenes on complex issues like content moderation, disinformation, and user privacy. To help unify these efforts and establish best practices,
Clara Tsao
co-founded the
Trust & Safety Professional Association
after serving as the Department of Homeland Security’s (DHS) chief technology officer from 2016–2019. She joined “Explain to Shane” to discuss how the trust and safety industry operates, and how her organization is tackling the challenges of the digital age.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of our talk. You can listen to this and other episodes of “Explain to Shane” on
AEI.org
and subscribe via your
preferred listening platform
. You can also read the full transcript of our discussion
here
. If you enjoyed this episode, leave us a review, and tell your friends and colleagues to tune in.
Shane Tews: Clara,
tell us a bit about the Trust & Safety Professional Association. What do
you guys do, how do you do it, and how long have you been in existence?
Clara Tsao: A lot of people think “trust and safety” is a
brand new field, but similar to privacy or cybersecurity, it was around for years
before people started using it as a common name or term. Still, I think we’re
starting to hear more people in DC and policymakers use it today.
Back in the e-commerce days, trust and safety teams existed to
protect the safety of users. But with the advent of social media, thornier
issues surfaced that were far less black and white. And so over the last few
years, more and more of these teams have ended up being built up within
companies. Sometimes they’re put under their legal team as an extension of copyright
and other kinds of issues when it comes to more content-based platforms. Other
times, we’ve seen trust and safety teams fall under operations. So early
companies sometimes may have teams that deal with customer success, spam, and
fraud; trust and safety is sometimes an extension of that. Sometimes it’s an
extension of cybersecurity.
The way this got started in 2019 was that there has never
been a shared community of practice for trust and safety professionals. Even
though a huge set of professionals has spent the last decade or more thinking
about these issues, there has never been a place for them to share what’s in
between. We got started after feeling that niche from the community of wanting
something like this to exist for a while.
Are you seeing
startups treat trust and safety departments as a must-have nowadays?
I think it depends on the company and their structure. The
sad part is: Much like every single issue, most companies don’t really think
about trust and safety until something really bad happens. We saw this in the
cybersecurity space where until major cyberattacks happened, most people weren’t
investing in cybersecurity infrastructure. After seeing what cyber incidents
could do, though, companies today will invest in cybersecurity regardless of whether
there’s an attack or not.
I think in the online space, people have demanded better
from companies. A lot of startup founders have had really bad trust and safety
experiences in their first run at it. And so they often realize the importance
of investing up front to have community practices in place.
Even today, we’re looking at new kinds of mediums for where
there’s new trust and safety issues. With new audio platforms like Clubhouse,
for example, companies are having to decide how to deal with content that is
really vulgar, shouldn’t be out there, or might be against a community standard
in a certain country or somewhere else. But it’s harder for startups — unlike
the bigger players — to have the resources to constantly monitor content.
But yeah, more and more companies are feeling the pull of
users demanding healthier communities online. So we’ve been trying to help smaller
companies and startups get involved with us by sponsoring them through grants. We’re
constantly trying to make sure we’re thinking of the best practices — not just for
the larger guys, but for the smaller ones as well.
What are some common
misconceptions about how content moderation works? Do people underestimate how
complex it is?
Absolutely — and the dialogue has changed significantly in
the past year. What’s been really fascinating is: Around COVID-19
disinformation and health misinformation, there’s more unanimous agreement that
this is bad content. Even if we’re unsure, we should take it down because
public health is on the line.
But around more polarizing issues like politics or
elections, there’s been a lot of back and forth on what’s good content and
what’s not — and, furthermore, about what good content moderation practices
look like. But historically, most people have thought about content moderation
as what’s been represented in the news: outsourced teams, normally in the
Philippines or somewhere else, working really terrible hours in bad conditions
trying to manually sort through pieces of content. And a lot of these teams
today are using automated software to minimize the amount of harm.
But that’s just part of the story. To paint a bigger picture
today, there are some teams that continue to use outsourced vendors, but a lot
of teams that deal with a higher volume of content can’t possibly have humans
monitor everything, so they turn to artificial intelligence.
Still, there’s another common misconception about whether or
not we can just automate ourselves out of this problem easily. This is a common
Silicon Valley example of trying to use technology to just get ourselves out of
a tricky problem. I think at the end of the day, companies have realized that
there continues to be the need for a human in the loop and for smart people to
think about determining a way forward for the process.
Does your work
address Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act? That’s a hot topic in
Washington, DC these days.
It comes up all the time. A lot of trust and safety teams
are not as familiar with policy, so they’re always questioning what actually
has weight when we think about the policy world. And I think Section 230 also
has divisions in the trust and safety community. So we try to educate people at
companies on what’s happening around policy and legislation.
Our main goal is to get more voices of professionals to help
explain the nuances of how complex tasks like content moderation are done at
companies of all sizes, and for them to also learn about what’s happening, because
a lot of trust and safety professionals aren’t at the table. It’s usually the
public affairs or government teams that tend to kind of play communicator or
deflect questions when these are raised.
And so we want to value that. There’s so many important
perspectives that are needed. And I think there are a lot of gaps right now among
policymakers and their understanding of how operations just work normally,
because you can’t really change something until you change the structure or you
have enough resourcing to allow things to actually come about. Otherwise a
policy is just a dead policy.
You were a
disinformation and security expert at DHS; how has that experience informed
your current work?
I was the chief technology officer of two teams. One focused
on election security, and another one focused on terrorists’ use of the
internet and homegrown extremism. I think for both issues, I felt like I was just
a professional translator. A lot of times, an issue was raised and people immediately
began trying to solve it using what were practically different languages. I
think at the core, most people when faced with a national security issue wanted
to problem solve together, but ended up speaking past each other and feeling
misunderstood.
There are so many communities that touch trust and safety as
an issue, but there was a real lack of sharing across the aisle there. So in US
government, when you touch an issue like terrorist content, it’s completely
separate from election security or broader disinformation. And when disinformation
became a bigger issue, it was really unclear where in the government it would
sit and under what jurisdiction. Also, a lot of these agency folks don’t have a
firm grasp on who to talk to at companies. They often had one government
affairs contact, but no one else to talk to. This is not just in the US but
internationally too.
I think there is still a lot of work ahead, and I feel like
a lot of my time in government was spent on educating people on this “technology
literacy” that I think a lot of stakeholders now have. But I still see this in
congressional hearings all the time where people confound or mix up different
issues from data privacy to advertising to how actual user-generated content
can be regulated. If you don’t separate those issues, it’s really hard to tackle
each one.