PAGE_TITLE: 
	Old Media Steps into the New Digital Economy with NBC/Snapchat Deal | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

NBC and Snapchat announced this past week that they plan to share the rights to the media footage of the Rio Olympics this summer. This is crucial step for keeping the 35-and-under audience engaged throughout the sporting activities, but NBC’s move also says a lot about the dynamic and competitive nature of the media marketplace.
A brand new viewing experience
The NBC/Snapchat deal opens the door to a whole new viewing experience. For the first time, viewers can follow not just the games, but also the athletes’ personal stories of challenge, pressure, triumph, and defeat. Clearly, this will make for a more engaging viewing experience.
That the stories and coverage will be appearing on social media further implies that a socially active audience can more easily share their content and impressions with their network. Combined, this new viewing experience will translate to excitement beyond the usual coverage, taking advantage of all the available mediums.
Evidence of a dynamic marketplace
In past years, when the live Olympic Games were being played out in the middle of the night for the United States, broadcasters struggled to decide when to air footage. Now, their challenge is learning how to manage the two-screen experience, where broadcast footage often takes a back seat to the mobile screen for immediate coverage.
The NBC/Snapchat agreement signals that media companies are starting to understand that they will most likely fare better with today’s audience if they share sports footage rather than try to curate all activities on proprietary platforms.
It is important to note that this transformation has happened organically, without interference from regulators. NBC negotiated the exclusive broadcasting rights to the 2016 Olympics with the International Olympics Committee several years ago. The Snapchat deal demonstrates that negotiations between private parties can produce consumer-friendly and innovative solutions, even in markets with exclusive rights and significant market shares.
With the expected big-data bonanza and multi-channel opportunities that come with this agreement, we can also anticipate new business models and innovation to appear in the advertising space. If we want to continue to have a vibrant marketplace, regulators and lawmakers should allow the markets to sort out what works and what doesn’t.
What is next?
The NBC/Snapchat deal is not the first of its kind – earlier this year, the NFL announced that Twitter would be granted the rights to stream ten of the Thursday Night Football games this coming fall – and it will not be the last.
Linear media viewing has given way to attention by topic, and the media giants of old are adapting. Corporations like NBC are smart to see the value of letting others in on the action by partnering with social media kings like Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and Snapchat. These partnerships keep the viewer focused on the topic, even as their attention moves from one screen to another.
Similarly, regulators would be smart to acknowledge the dynamism in this marketplace. The best way to unleash innovation and create a more vibrant and engaging viewing experience is simply to allow market forces to work.
This post was originally published on TechPolicyDaily.