PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Future of Micromobility: Highlights from My Conversation with Michele Kyrouz | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Will shared micromobility technology survive the COVID-19
pandemic? What are the benefits of electric scooters and other micromobility
projects, and what are the regulatory barriers to their success? Michele
Kyrouz, lawyer and transportation technology expert, joined me on the latest
episode of Explain to Shane to discuss what’s in store for micromobility moving
forward.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of our talk. You can listen to the podcast
here
and read our full discussion
here
. You can also subscribe to the Explain to Shane podcast on
iTunes
or
Stitcher
, or download the podcast on
Ricochet
.
Shane Tews: Michele came to my attention when I noticed
that she posted an article that she had written about why shared micro-mobility
will survive post-pandemic. And the thing that really caught my eye was you
pointed out that it’s no riskier than using a grocery cart, and I loved it. I
loved the visual you had there and it really put all of this in perspective for
me. So let’s talk first of all about what’s going on with scooters and bikes,
whereas we’re all kind of dealing with this post-pandemic and the fear that
some city mayors and city councils have had about the continued use of scooters
and bikes. Can you talk about the social risk and what we should or shouldn’t
be concerned about?
Michele Kyrouz:  Yeah.
You know, when I think about transportation and how it’s going to come back as
we all get back to work, I think about it in two buckets. One is the risk of
germs in the air and the other is germs on surfaces. And when you get on a
subway or on a bus, you kind of have both of those risks, right? You have the
risk of breathing air in a confined space that somebody next to you might have
the coronavirus, and then you also are touching surfaces around you. So what
occurred to me about micro-mobility, as we look forward to getting back to work
and getting back to transportation, is that it really only has a surface risk.
You’re out there in the fresh air and all you’re doing is holding on to a
handle, or with a bike sitting on a seat. And that’s really a risk that we’ve
come to learn to manage, in part because even in the middle of this pandemic,
we’re still going to the grocery store.
And as I was going to the grocery store and getting out my
disinfectant wipes and wiping everything down and wearing my gloves, I thought,
it’s really not that different to ride a scooter. And so I really feel it’s a
risk that we have learned to manage during the pandemic, and that we feel more
comfortable managing going forward. Whereas if something potentially has
contamination in the air, there’s no way to really know if you’ve avoided a
risk or whether you’re being subject to a risk. You can’t really clean the air
the way you can get that satisfaction of wiping down a handle.
You mentioned in your piece there is the possibility of
creating NanoSeptic handlebars and brake levers. I’m not familiar with those,
can you give us a couple of minutes on that or a second on that?
Companies are trying to figure out, how can we give riders
more comfort that in fact the handlebars are not infected. And so one option, I
think it was the company Wheels, they have sort of a seated scooter product in
a shared environment, and they announced that they were going to implement
these NanoSeptic handlebars with a material that’s actually designed to kill
germs. Sort of a self-cleaning surface powered by light with these
nano-crystals that can really kind of clean on their own. And I think that’s a
really interesting idea, and I think we’ll see more companies go down this road
of trying to come up with solutions to make people feel more comfortable.
I think someone else pointed out on Twitter that actually
just leaving scooters out in the sunlight, that the UV from sunlight actually
also helps to deter germs. And then you know, there are other things scooter
companies can do, whether it’s giving you the wipes right there on your device
or selling you a set of clip-on handle grips that you just snap on each time you
want a ride and then take them with you. I think there are a number of
innovations that scooter companies can work with to give people some extra
comfort going forward.
Let’s talk about some of the regulatory challenges that
come to mind on what needs to be done, how cities or counties can handle the
revamping of their regulatory transportation programs to make these
micro-mobility programs sustainable. What do we need to be doing?
When you look at shared micro-mobility programs in cities,
especially kick scooters, what we saw was an effort by cities to put in place
some regulatory programs to control some of the initial clutter that we saw
when scooters were first introduced. And what I think has happened over time is
that cities have really put in a lot of regulations and a lot of fees in an
effort to control use of kick scooters. And in fact, they’ve gone overboard. So
you have to ask yourself, is micro-mobility good for cities? Do we want to have
shared scooter systems? And if we do, and if cities believe they’re good for
all the reasons we’ve been discussing and they can help with mode shift to get
people out of cars, they can provide the first and last mile to transit. If
scooters can be helpful to cities in that way, shouldn’t cities take a step
back and say, how are we regulating these? How are we imposing operational
costs on these scooter programs that are totally unnecessary? And what can we
do now to make it more economical to operate these systems in cities?
Fees are one way that cities can really revamp their
programs and make it more economical to run shared scooter programs. And then
some of the other things that I think would be really helpful for scooter
companies involve reducing a lot of the regulations that really aren’t
necessary. So we see restrictions on riders like speed restrictions, curfews
where you can’t ride a scooter at night, or geo-fenced areas where the scooter
dies if you ride it down by the beach, things of that nature. And when you look
at how we regulate cars, I mean we post a speed limit, let’s say it’s 25 miles
an hour in a school zone, but we don’t force car companies to put a regulator
in the car that automatically reduces the car speed to 25 miles an hour when
you enter that school zone. We trust riders to obey the rules of the road and
if they don’t, they face ticketing and other enforcement. So it seems like
there’s an overzealous approach to regulating how riders are using scooters
that has imposed a lot of costs on the industry that are unnecessary.
The National League of Cities did an ability-to-access
test where they talked about the bias of future investments and initiatives
against the populations that are most in need of better mobility, especially in
urban areas. And so are we seeing more cities look at how many people per
square foot you can utilize a micro mobility device like a scooter or bike
versus a car as a given mode of transportation?
Yeah, I think road geometry is a really interesting concept
and it says, when we look at our streets historically we’ve asked questions
like how many cars per minute, what is the throughput of cars or vehicles on
our streets? And instead we should be looking at how many people we’re moving.
So the way you can move a lot of people is to either have one big vehicle, like
a bus with 50 people on it, and each person only takes up two square feet. Or
to have a really small vehicle, like a scooter or bike, that rides in a bike
lane. You can move a lot of people that way. So the modes that we see on city
streets that have really efficient road geometry are big buses and small micro
vehicles. I think when you put the multimodal transportation system together,
you have to say, not everybody’s going to ride the bus, right?
Not everybody’s going to take one particular mode. There are
plenty of people who don’t want to ride a scooter. And so you have to give
people lots of different options, but options that are better than one person
driving a 4,000 pound SUV to drive one mile. Think about the amount of space
that takes up on the street, and the amount of traffic that gets clogged by
everybody driving in their own car. By offering these other modes, like
micro-mobility and public transit, and putting them together in a multimodal
system, cities can really encourage a better flow of traffic.
Michelle, tell us about the book, because you obviously
you’ve spent a lot of time working in this area. It’s called
The New
Mobility Handbook
. What are we going to learn?
Well what I was thinking and wanting to write about the
future of transportation is how we can create a multimodal system in cities
that uses all three modes. It says, “Let’s continue to use cars, but
change how we use them to make them more effective and to only use them for the
trips where they’re really necessary.” And then let’s make room on our
streets for micromobility and really build the infrastructure in cities to
support safe riding of bikes and scooters. And then let’s make public transit great,
right? We have to make public transit faster and more reliable for it to be a
great option for people in cities.
So what I’m doing in
The New Mobility Handbook
is
just laying out how we can harness these new technologies like electric bikes
and scooters, rideshare, all the cell phone technologies that have come to be
in the last couple of decades. How we can harness these new technologies in
order to make transportation work better in our cities. And the way to do that
is not to just go totally in the technology direction, but also to marry that
with our old-school urbanist policies about the best ways that cities can
manage traffic. So for decades, we’ve had city planners saying that we should
do congestion merge pricing, we should price fairly the impact that cars are
having on cities.
And now what we’re seeing is people really try to bring
together some of those classic urbanist policies and put them together with our
new technologies we have available today and say, “Let’s put it all
together and come up with a multimodal system that works better for
everyone.”