PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Elephant in the Room - the Internet and Its Governance | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

It was said several times this past week at the Internet Governance Forum (IGF) that the elephant in the room was the IGF itself; everyone was trying to decide what to do with it. Continue forward? Pull the plug? Finding a more productive path forward without an outcome document is challenging, but It’s part of the IGF formula. It’s the best way to keep all interested parties discussing the major issues without spelling out the finer points in a document that would divide the effort.  The beauty of the Internet is that it represents so many different things to different people – a path to knowledge, power, commerce, freedom of expression, and entertainment are only a few examples.  No single use of the Internet needs to trump the others, nor do the rules of engagement need to choose one interest over another.  The Internet was built with an open architecture for the users to enhance, whoever they may be, and its governance model has the same structure.
There was another elephant in the room that stayed in the shadows throughout the week: governing the Internet itself.   There are three groups grappling with how to manage the larger global Internet challenges going forward:  ICANN, the organization with the role to coordinate the technical functions that keep basic Internet infrastructure running smoothly; the Internet Governance Forum (IGF), which was created as a global forum for public policy issues that are not fully technical; and the recently established World Economic Forum (WEF), which claims to have evolved from the NETMundial conference this past year and seeks to implement the
NetMundial principles
.
The problem with bringing these three crowds together around a set of ideas is that they all have different priorities. Typically, each group is concerned with one specific issue and has only minor interest in the other topics.
These groups continue to exist for two reasons: mission and money.  ICANN’s mission is to provide technical coordination for the Internet.  IGF is the bridge between ICANN and a diverse group of stakeholders who want an annual dialogue focusing on holistic issues of Internet governance.  WEF’s mission appears to be taking these issues to groups who have money and like the idea of the NetMundial mission but are not part of the traditional Internet governance organizations themselves.
WEF’s mission has made many involved in this process, myself included, wonder why we need a third organization and a third set of Internet-governance-related meetings to attend around the globe.  The answer its creators have given is that NetMundial principles need their own organization to help move them forward.  When I hear this answer, I think of Larry Elision taking over a yacht club to host the American’s cup in San Francisco when the negotiations with the current club didn’t go his way.  With the new club, he could write the rules to ensure his point of view was favored.  WEF has a similar feel; if the regular participants in Internet governance don’t favor the need for the NETMundial principles, then find a group that does and let them take action.
I hope to be proven wrong, but until I am, I worry that the three-ring Internet governance circus will divide the work done by the dedicated individuals who make up ICANN and IGF. The individuals who work very hard to keep these two groups functioning will be pushed aside by those who can fly their G6’s to Davos to “dialogue”with their like-minded colleagues. The WEF is not a diverse community, nor are its members and contributors savvy on what makes the network systems and the open Internet operate.  Having a select group of people at ICANN and IGF craft Internet policy does take time, money and personal energy.  Taking these policy issues to a whole new group that may not have an understanding of the underlying technology and policies that govern the process will create fissures in the current multi-stakeholder process.
IGF is always in need of financing to keep its operations going forward. Managing the information flow of the work groups and planning annual programs including the annual IGF event require a steady investment by the many interested parties to keep them going forward.  However, we need to ensure we have all the interested parties at the table, not just those that can afford to be part of an exclusive, chosen club.
This post was originally published on TechPolicyDaily.