PAGE_TITLE: 
	Securing Children Online: Balance Caution with Opportunity | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

By Shane Tews
In March, it was
reported
that
Facebook had plans to develop a new Instagram product for children under the
age of 13. Facebook follows the Federal Trade Commission’s (FTC)
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act
regulations,
which require users to be at least 13 years old. So how Instagram — a Facebook
subsidiary — plans to manage age verification and monitor underage accounts is
a key question. The Campaign for a Commercial-Free Childhood
wants
Facebook to abandon
the project due to concern that more screens, more interaction with the
internet, and further commercialization of education would “put young users at
great risk.”
via Twenty20
As education has shifted online, “
edutainment
” portals
have given younger students online social environments to engage with peers.
Adults are expected to understand the risks of using the internet and sharing
information on digital platforms. But for children, we need to ensure personal
information and images are managed and approved by parents or guardians. That’s
a difficult task — not only for social media, but for educational institutions
and entertainment mediums targeted at children.
The regulatory obligation of consent from adults to give a child
legal access to any application has been on the books since 1999. But here’s
the catch: The legal-access question is typically hidden in those terms of
service agreements we click through without reading. And beyond clicking
“accept,” denying a minor access is difficult.
The challenge is how to effectively anchor the authentication
process from the adult approver to the child participant. The parent or
guardian should feel comfortable that appropriate measures are in place to
protect their child’s personal data, limit exposure to inappropriate content,
and keep commercial messaging contained. To accommodate an appropriate trust
anchor, developers face a number of challenges. The first is managing access to
the web portal or application, followed by managing access to content in the
portal. Last (but far from least), managing any data collected on young users
is crucial, as this information is a prized target for data thieves.
By requiring authorization from a verified parent or adult
guardian in order for a child to participate in online activities, the granting
of access should be contingent on real-time implementation of a valued
identification system. And the more robust a platform is, the more important it
becomes to insist on initial age verification to enable ongoing identity
management. Once authenticated by a guardian, a child can access interactive
content and engage with other children, students, educators, and validated
adults. There should then be a mechanism for ongoing participation in the
monitoring process by both the parent and the digital institution.
Policies on minors’ access to the internet and mobile apps can be updated via the creation of an effective, transparent authentication process for the flow of information about the child. This means adopting an authentication method that pairs a child with a parent or guardian for approval before granting access to programs or apps. Financial institutions, for example, use “
Know Your Customer
” regulations to monitor customers’ risks and financial transactions. These systems use authentication methods that can be restructured for students — specifically children under the age of 13 — to ensure they are authenticated onto the web portal or application and that their data is secure.
There is a balance to be struck between managing risk and knowing
that clever kids will find their way onto digital platforms regardless of age.
Facebook’s products, including Instagram, can be both fun and informative —
hence their popularity. But it’s not just Facebook: Kids are logged on all
across the web and in some cases can use mobile apps more effectively than
adults can. But risks remain, as does the potential for exploitation, child
identity theft, cyberbullying, and shaming — which are real concerns both on
and offline. This is why Congress and the FTC should continue to show interest
in ensuring sufficient mechanisms are in place to protect children online.
Facebook may be the current concern, but commercial and
educational institutions should have transparent plans and processes for
admitting children onto digital platforms via verifiable parental consent. We
need to think of children as potential users of both the platforms and the
information they grant access to. And importantly, the policies we plan now
should be designed to enable technology updates as the digital economy evolves.
COVID-19 has altered how we work, educate, and entertain ourselves
online. As policymakers push for more investment in internet infrastructure
access across America, the internet’s importance will only continue to grow. It
is time to align online safety policies toward children with the internet’s
vast opportunities — rather than trying to hide the digital economy from our
next generation.