PAGE_TITLE: 
	It’s Time for Corporate Cyber Responsibility | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

By Shane Tews
The National Institute of Standards and Technology
reports
that hundreds of billions of dollars are lost to cybercrime each year — possibly as much as 1–4 percent of gross domestic product. Although cybersecurity risks continue to impede our ability to harness the digital economy’s full benefits, there remains no comprehensive vulnerability management approach to protect the digital assets and data that reside in these systems.
via Twenty20
While industries consider ways to curtail the damage from
ransomware hits and cyber scams, the problem still stems from humans more than from
machines. The inability to decipher who has legitimate access to corporate
networks and who gains access through nefarious means remains a weak link in
how companies protect their network assets. And while installing updated
security patches and implementing threat intelligence measures can mitigate
cyber breaches, recent
developments
indicate
the initial act of breaking into a system is
a vital point of failure. So how do criminal actors get in?
Black hat hackers are frequently recruited on the dark web via help wanted ads offering lucrative payments for hacking jobs. In Positive Technologies’ August 2020 penetration test
study
, hackers only needed 30 minutes to infiltrate a local network for 93 percent of tested companies. Seventy-seven percent of the time, they could break into corporate web applications and manipulate networks as an insider. And at 68 percent of companies, successful attacks on web applications were conducted by cracking an employee’s credentials — most likely their passwords.
Once a criminal actor penetrates a system, they can steal customer information, change or eliminate data, and steal intellectual property — all while posing as an employee. They can also sell instructions for how to access a corporation’s web resources to other dark web operators. Positive Technologies also
reported
that the dark web’s 10 most notorious forums have over 8 million registered users and 80 million messages full of how-tos for hacking corporate web services. Ninety percent of the posts come from people interested in buying hacking services, not hackers themselves.
Corporations should see these statistics, realize an initial
breach is relatively easy, and improve web security. If a cybercriminal will
pay $10,000 on the dark web to hack your website, defending it will cost more.
Additionally, tiered access and identity asset management practices should
prioritize perimeter security. Many risk access protocols still focus too
narrowly on a system’s hardware and software components — not the humans who
control them.
Another factor is the value of information stolen from
inside a corporate system. The dark web’s personal data market is thriving
because the payout for this data is so lucrative. For example, a corporation’s
retail sales payment page is a notorious weak spot. Shoppers enter valuable
personal information such as credit card numbers onto millions of websites
every day, and hackers can set up trackers that collect this information in
real time. Commercial web operators who require these data should thus be
obligated to encrypt them — both when they’re being entered and while they’re resting
inside the network.
Simple security steps such as authentication and authorization to a web portal or application are also must-haves. For example, Peloton recently
exposed
user data by allowing unauthenticated users — anyone, anywhere — to access user information via the company’s application programming interface. Insisting on authentication for machines to communicate could solve these simple access issues.
During his recent testimony before the Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, Colonial Pipeline’s CEO
admitted
the company didn’t require multifactor authentication for entry into company systems and lacked a contingency plan for cybersecurity incidents such as ransomware attacks. This is yet another instance in which authentication mechanisms could have protected a company’s networks from catastrophe.
The
SolarWinds hack
also highlighted the importance of having trusted supply chain partners. After hackers embedded malicious code into what was considered a trustworthy supplier’s software update, the approximately 18,000 customers who downloaded the update were
potentially vulnerable
to an attack. Corporate boards and oversight committees should thus establish compliance and control mechanisms such as regular vendor and data security audits to manage potential risks and vulnerabilities.
Security companies offer solutions to these problems, so why
don’t corporations use them? The most common answer is that companies don’t
consider cybersecurity a highest-risk-analysis concern. However, corporate
boards are realizing they cannot afford to ignore cybersecurity or consider it
an information technology expenditure without risk analysis. In a
2020 PricewaterhouseCoopers survey
, two-thirds of
respondents said a cyber breach would reflect negatively on their fiduciary
responsibilities as board members. Yet only 37 percent of respondents stated
the board understood the company’s crisis management plan “very well.” And just
32 percent said the board had a strong understanding of its company’s
cybersecurity vulnerabilities.
While the government works to enable better public-private
partnership and improve information sharing to mitigate attacks, corporations
need to do their part and ensure they have covered the basics.