PAGE_TITLE: 
	Building a “Trusted Future” Online: Highlights from My Conversation with Adam Golodner | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

How can we
achieve a real, certifiable level of comfort and trust between consumers and
the companies that make our technologies? The standards for what constitutes
trust and safety vary from user to user; we need to find a tractable way to
build out indicators of trust that will allow both producers and users to see
risks clearly.
On the
latest episode of “Explain to Shane,” I sat down
Adam
Golodner
, co-chair of
Trusted Future
—a new think tank dedicated to enhancing
trust in today’s digital ecosystem—to discuss the technical and engineering
components of trust and safety, along with what these topics have to do with
cybersecurity, privacy, and the supply chain.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of our talk. You can listen to
this
and
other episodes
of “Explain to Shane” on AEI.org and subscribe via your
preferred listening platform
. You can also read the full transcript of our discussion
here
. If you enjoyed this episode, leave us a review, and tell your friends and colleagues to tune in.
Shane Tews: Adam, your new think tank,
Trusted Future, seeks to bring expertise, research, and best practices to the
forefront of the policy conversation around the digital ecosystem. What are your
goals for this organization?
Adam
Golodner: We’re focused on this gap between
the level of trust everyone has in current technologies versus emerging
technologies like 5G, 6G, artificial intelligence (AI), quantum computing, and
new functionality in satellites. People need to feel they can trust products,
services, and companies in order to fully utilize the opportunities that these
new tools will bring to our lives.
On one hand, what are the indications of trust that producers of products and services can state that they follow—almost like a Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certification for green buildings? On the other hand, consumers have their own standards that they want met. Whether you’re an enterprise, individual consumer, critical infrastructure, the military, or intelligence networks, you should be able to say, “These are things I need in order to feel comfortable putting your product or service into my infrastructure.” One would’ve thought we’d done this over the past 20–30 years, but it turns out it’s been done in a very siloed way. We haven’t put it together in a framework.
So we’re
trying to build what I’m calling a “trust framework” that provides tractable
numbers and indicators of trust that one can look at in order to decide
something that’s really pretty simple: Do I trust this product, service, or
company to be in my infrastructure and to protect my operations, data,
customers, and partners’ information and operations?
Who are you looking to engage?
We have a terrific advisory board that includes Jim Kohlenberger, who has worked in technology for 30 years or so and held many positions in the White House. He’s a terrific head on global technology policy. Also on our advisory board is Admiral Mike Rogers, the former head of the National Security Agency and US cyber command. We also have Maureen Ohlhausen, a former Federal Trade Commission commissioner and acting chair; Danny Weitzner from Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who is a former White House and Commerce Department official; Karen Kornbluh, who is a former ambassador to the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development; and Smitty Smith, who is a former Federal Communications Commission official.
I think we
have put together a pretty wide-ranging slate of people to help think through
these issues. As we build out this trust framework, we’ll be working with the
best minds that we can find in the chief information security officer (CISO)
rank from small, medium-sized, and global companies to help us think through
tractable things. We really just want tractable things and companies that are
making emerging technologies.
You recently published a
piece
in Dark Reading that talked about the importance of offensive creativity in engineering systems, as opposed to defense. Can you elaborate on this concept?
It has become
a refrain within the security community that the advantage goes to the
offense—not to the defense. What we mean is that if you want to break into a
network, steal information, turn a network off, or turn devices into bricks,
it’s way easier to do that than it is to defend against it. This is true
because software by nature is an engineering exercise. It’s not a civil
engineering exercise like building a bridge, which is math. It’s actually a
different, logic-based exercise. Really, coding is more art than it is science.
And so there
are always bugs in products or vulnerabilities that someone looking for them
may be able to exploit. This is just the way that we build. We’re getting much
better at building code and making it more secure from the start, and this is
part of what we’re doing with the trust framework.
These days,
most of the exploits people try is through what we call “social engineering.”
That is, they are trying to get us to fall for a trick. They’re trying to get us
to think that an email from a crook is actually an email from a colleague. When
you click it, it will embed malware onto your mobile device if your mobile
device allows you to do that, or onto your desktop if you’re working from a desktop,
your desktop allows you to do that, and it doesn’t have built-in defenses that
can catch the problem right away.
More than 75
percent of the approaches that lead to exploits of vulnerabilities across the
infrastructure come from these social engineering methodologies that, whether
it’s a criminal gang trying to steal your money or a nation-state trying to
steal your information or some blended threat as part of an actual war, will
try to either obfuscate your ability to use something or try to actually shut
down your infrastructure.
If you’re
the defender, you have to think about ways to make that not possible. You shouldn’t
have to be a CISO to defend a network. You should be able to do so as an
individual or a small- or medium-sized business,
and
if you’re defending a large enterprise. We have a dearth of
cyber experts in the US; we’re about 500,000 behind what we need. And right
now, clearly the scales are on the side of the offense.
Apple CEO Tim Cook was in Washington, DC
last week, and he talked about this but more in the essence of privacy as well
as security. He mentioned some of the antitrust proposals in Congress, one of
which would mandate “sideloading” so that application (app) store operators have
to allow any type of software on the device. Why is that such a problem?
Policymakers
need to understand the technical, practical, and global implications of any
policy affecting security or privacy in technology. I start from the
proposition that commercial information technology products are built once and
sold globally. That’s how the industry works and is how one drives security and
privacy into the infrastructure; it’s the same product everywhere, be it an
enterprise, consumer network, critical infrastructure, intelligence network, or
military network. So if you create some policy that affects a product that is
built once and sold globally, you are in effect creating something that impacts
the global infrastructure.
When
considering proposals that force platform operators to allow “sideloading,” or
forcing mobile device creators to allow any app to be downloaded onto the
device, you have to figure out the technical and practical impacts. You might step
back and think about how the apps stores reject more than 700,000 apps a year
because they would violate security or privacy policies, and are sometimes
manufactured by our adversaries. I think in any objective sense, my own view is
that it’s not good for security. You then have to say, “My policy choice in
some way is not good for security. Is that a good or bad policy?”
I think you
could run into non-trivial unintended consequences by undermining security and
privacy of the infrastructure via unvetted apps entering the ecosystem.
Security agencies around the world for the past five years have looked at this
growing threat to the mobile ecosystem and the use of social engineering to trick
people into downloading malware that will then steal information or be able to
shut down devices. Pretty much across the board, they’ve all said this is a bad
policy.
We also want
to make sure from a broad policy perspective that we don’t have policy proposals
that undermine companies that are actually competing on security and privacy. If
I’m Mr. Cook, I’m thinking about how we’re driving security and privacy into
the ecosystem of the mobile device. Now, in effect, someone is saying, “Don’t
do that.” This message has unintended consequences and is counterproductive for
everyone who has been following what all of our security agencies have been
saying for 20 years: “In fact, build it in. Please compete on security and
privacy.” If we are talking about policies, which are choices, make choices
that don’t undermine global information infrastructure.
What work do you have coming up on the
horizon?
I think the
trust issue is multidimensional, and you have to get to a place where we move
away from the siloed approach to try to get to what is trusted. So it is
software development, but it’s also hardware development. It’s the supply
chain. It’s the privacy engineering that’s built into the product and service.
That’s what
we’re trying to get to: boiling down this trust from something that gives you a
gestalt or gut view about it to something that gives you a more objective and
tractable way to understand whether you should trust this product, service, or
company.