PAGE_TITLE: 
	Balancing Privacy, Innovation, and Public Safety: Highlights from My Conversation with Brian King | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Support for
a federal privacy law is gaining bipartisan momentum, but privacy laws that
have already been implemented in California and Europe have had mixed effects. How
can lessons from these existing regulations help inform the creation of a federal
privacy law in the US?
Brian King
, director of internet policy and industry affairs at
Clarivate
and a representative of the Intellectual Property Constituency at the
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
(ICANN), joined my latest podcast to break down the challenges of privacy regulation. Together, we discussed how privacy laws can create access challenges to information that users need for compliance with trademark and intellectual property rules and public safety laws.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of our talk. You can listen to “Explain to Shane” on
AEI.org
and subscribe via your
preferred listening platform
. You can also read the full transcript of our discussion
here
. If you enjoyed this episode, leave us a review, and tell your friends and colleagues.
Shane Tews: Give us a quick primer on how
privacy laws in the US work.
Brian King: The
US takes what is considered a sectoral approach to privacy laws, which means different
sectors are regulated differently depending on what type of personal data is
being regulated. Examples of sectors include health data and financial data, so
listeners might be familiar with HIPPA (which protects personal health
information) or the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (which protects financial data).
Do you think we should have a federal
privacy law since we’re seeing such strong reactions to things like the California
Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) and Europe’s General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR)?
Yes — I
think the time is right for a federal privacy law in the US. My personal view
is that it is very difficult for organizations to manage data breach rules. Currently,
data breach laws vary across all 50 states based on standards like the
likelihood and magnitude of consumer harm (i.e., the number of records that
have been breached before a notification obligation arises). And the time is
really right to protect data in a way that’s predictable for consumers, companies,
and organizations that need to comply with this patchwork of laws. A
consolidated omnibus privacy law in the US would make life easier for all
parties involved.
I really
sympathize with the lawyers that need to keep track of all these rules and
advise their clients on ways to comply with these laws. In effect, I think some
state or some jurisdiction will become the least common denominator or the gold
standard, which will become the de facto standard across all 50 states. And if
that’s going to happen anyway, why not make life easier for these organizations
who truly do want to comply with data privacy and data protection laws? Let’s
give them one federal standard to live up to.
What’s going on with Europe’s GDPR, and how
are we managing that here in the United States?
The GDPR is an
overall privacy law, not a sectoral approach to privacy regulation. As its name
implies, it’s a general regulation that protects personal data of all sorts. It
does include some special categories of personal data that require additional
protection, but it sets a baseline floor for the collection, processing,
storage, and even the deletion of personal data. It also takes a very broad
definition of what personal data is. It varies a little bit from what we’re
used to in the US, which is personally identifiable information: any data
relating to an identified or identifiable individual. With this very broad
definition of personal data, GDPR then governs every aspect of how that
personal data might be processed from collection onto deletion.
Unlike its
predecessor, the Data Protection Directive — which, like all directives under European
Union (EU) law, had to be implemented individually by all EU member states — the
GDPR is a regulation which became automatically binding on all the EU member
states the moment it was passed and took effect in 2018. It did not have the
ramp-up time or the potential for varying implementations by the various EU
member states, and that became kind of the de facto global standard because the
European economy is so strong and European consumers do business all over the
world, and Europe trades with jurisdictions everywhere. The exchange of
personal data, then, if it impacted European citizens, became a global matter.
The standard
for fines possible under GDPR is up to 4 percent of a company’s “global annual
turnover,” they call it. We might say “revenue” in the US, but it’s up to 4
percent of their global annual revenue that could be assessed in a fine under
GDPR.
The actual implementation has been messy, and
I know you’ve dealt with this in your role in the Intellectual Property
Constituency at ICANN. Explain why not having access to information because of
a privacy law is a challenge.
It’s
important to understand that when the domain name system was conceived, there
was a database of information called WHOIS — a useful tool to look up the owner
of any given domain name in the system so that the domain owner could be
contacted about technical issues related to the functioning of their domain
name. It provided a directory or an address book of everyone who was in this
small circle of computer scientists working on the domain name system itself. As
this system grew up and businesses went online and online consumers interacted
more, WHOIS provided a valuable tool for a number of organizations ranging from
law enforcement to intellectual property owners to consumer protection
organizations that needed to identify who was behind a domain name and a
website.
The availability
of WHOIS information over the years has allowed those kind of “good guy”
organizations or folks acting in the public interest to identify, contact, and potentially
prosecute bad actors, but often, they just validate that the person behind a
website is who they say they are. For quite some time, in order to procure a
Secure Sockets Layer Certificate, for example, which would encrypt the web
content going back and forth, the owner of the website had to be validated
against that WHOIS information. So, WHOIS became a backstop that kept everybody
honest in an internet that is largely anonymized. Then, as the internet grew
up, that WHOIS information grew up with it and became baked into a lot of
cybersecurity tools and best practices.
So, along
came GDPR, and real questions arose about whether personal data could be
published in that WHOIS database. Because there were no controls about who
could access that database and for what purpose, that ran afoul of several of GDPR’s
data protection principles.
What are the law enforcement, government,
and IP people looking for that hasn’t come to fruition in ICANN’s attempt to
adapt WHOIS to GDPR’s rules?
ICANN’s IP
Constituency, along with a variety of other constituencies, were looking for a
system for standardized access to WHOIS data: a way that the requester of the
data could be validated, authenticated, agree to process the data in compliance
with data protection laws, and that they had a valid and lawful basis for
processing the data, or that they perhaps owned a trademark that was being
infringed, for example, by the domain name in question.
And so what
we were looking for was a system that would allow up-front validation of who
you are, what IP rights you have, what you’re asserting, and to build an
equation that would result in the disclosure of that data when the right
authenticated, accredited requesters needed it. That was the objective, but
things went awry from there.
What I think
it boils down to is that the remaining challenges are grounded in the fears of
monumental fines under GDPR. There is really no clarity or certainty available
for ICANN and for the domain name registries and registrars that operate under
contracts with ICANN. There’s no certainty that they won’t be fined for
providing the data to a trademark owner or a law enforcement agency.
So, what do you recommend?
I think we should
follow the guidance that the European data protection authorities have given
us. This is frustrating and perhaps a bit unclear why, but we have departed
from the guidance that we were given by the Belgian Data Protection Authority
(DPA), which is the de facto regulator of ICANN, based on ICANN’s presence in
Brussels. They asked us to develop a System Standardized Access/Disclosure (SSAD)
that consists of centralized decision-making about whether a requester’s lawful
basis is valid and ensures there are no data protection issues vis-à-vis the
domain name registrant.
We were
asked to develop that centralized model, but the contracted parties thought the
only way to control their own liability was to own the disclosure
decision-making. That was really unfortunate in that we didn’t answer the call
of the Belgian DPA and the European Data Protection Board, which encouraged
ICANN to develop a centralized disclosure model. We could have done that, and I
think we still can depending on how the ICANN board handles the SSAD-building recommendations
from the Generic Names Supporting Organization Council. I think that more could
be done here.
I think that it’s certainly possible to do an SSAD with a robust notice to registrants about the possibility that their data could be processed if they are alleged to be infringing on someone else’s rights or committing a crime. It will also require  hard work on standards for what it takes for an organization to become accredited to access WHOIS data and what kind of rights need to be present and asserted in a given case.