PAGE_TITLE: 
	Privacy and Europe’s Data Protection Law: Problems and Implications for the US | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

The European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) goes into effect May 25. The GDPR is Europe’s response to the digital age and the accompanying collection of personally identifiable information on a massive scale. It harmonizes privacy guidelines across the 28 EU member states, but the implications of the GDPR are further reaching — it’s causing businesses across the globe to reevaluate how they collect, store, and use data and could affect the US government’s approach to privacy moving forward. It could also cause a few problems.
Via REUTERS
What is the GDPR?
In a nutshell, the GDPR aims to create “digital rights” for EU citizens, requiring companies that collect or use personal data to ask for consent from their users or customers. To comply with the GDPR, a company must protect information such as users’ internet protocol (IP) addresses and cookie histories in addition to data such as names, addresses, government ID numbers, biometrics, race or ethnicity, sexual orientation, political opinions, and tagged photos. All organizations that collect personal information (including third-party vendors) are considered data controllers and are accountable for any data collected, processed, or disseminated on an EU citizen. This includes companies that maintain databases containing personal data, even if they do not have a physical presence in the EU.
The GDPR requires organizations to establish policies, procedures, and response structures to address issues that may arise around GDPR-protected information. For example, GDPR compliance requires organizations to define processes for how data is managed and protected, and requires breach notices within 72 hours of incidents. They also have to be prepared for requests from EU citizens, who can ask for their information to be corrected, updated, or deleted by the organization holding the data. Organizations that don’t comply with the GDPR will pay a heavy price, such as fines up to 4 percent of annual global revenue for an infringement of customers’ information or a breach of security not reported correctly. This potential penalty has garnered the attention of corporate general counsels and data protection authorities around the globe. Since much of the data that will be protected by the GDPR is currently collected by firms to create profiles on clients to be sold for marketing and advertising purposes, the dynamics of regulatory risk versus monetary reward are about to change.
Problems on the horizon
The right to be forgotten is pitted against the right to be informed. One potential set of problems the GDPR rules create with the request to keep identity data private is that this information is currently used by law enforcement, cybersecurity professionals and researchers, and trademark and intellectual property rights holders to determine who bad actors committing security or legal violations on the internet are. The publicly available data that is used to inform threat intelligence networks, find bad actors, and block them from accessing networks will no longer be available under the GDPR. I’ve discussed the security implications of the GDPR in a
previous blog
, as well as how it is
upending
the domain name system. Businesses are also having a difficult time
understanding the scope
of the GDPR’s requirements.
Implications for the US
In the US, the central question for privacy regulation is why the data is collected rather than on whom data is collected. Instead of a blanket requirement for the protection of individual privacy, US laws and regulations request data be collected by industry: The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act protects specific health care information; the Fair Credit Reporting Act provides consumers the ability to view, correct, contest, and limit the uses of credit reports; and the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act requires financial institutions to explain their information-sharing practices to their customers and to safeguard sensitive data.
According to a recent
PricewaterhouseCoopers survey
, 77 percent of US companies expect to spend about $1 million or more to comply with the GDPR. Companies with the capability to separate and migrate data are moving quickly to transfer customers’ data physically located in the EU onto servers in the US. If located in the US, data on users that aren’t EU citizens will be governed by US privacy laws instead of the GDPR.
Privacy has dominated headlines in the US with the recent congressional hearings on Facebook, but the hearings also brought to light that most internet users quickly click through terms of service without reading them to gain access to an application or a website. With consumer data privacy being under such a hot spotlight, one may wonder if the US will be next to enact sweeping privacy regulations. Will Congress make a concerted push toward a national privacy standard for consumer information? Or will the practice of clicking and collecting stay the same in the land that created today’s social media marketing machines? Sens. Amy Klobuchar (D-MN) and John Kennedy (R-LA) have released a public outline that mirrors much of the GDPR guidance. Their draft outline for legislation plans to focus on the information gathering by social media platforms and creating rights for consumers.
As technology evolves it is important to ensure both users and the creators know what data is being used and how. This can be enabled by creating terms of use for technologies that are concise and easy for consumers to understand. Consumers should be able to know what information is being captured on them and their actions and how long this data is being kept by any entity. We have seen a quick evolution toward this practice in 2018.
Technology too can help inform consumers. Transparency and parity of information gathering can resolve many of these challenges without slowing the evolution of technology.