PAGE_TITLE: 
	What’s Next for 12-GHz Spectrum? Highlights from My Conversation with V. Noah Campbell and Richard Bennett | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

By Shane Tews
In December 2020, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) announced a
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking
(NPRM) on the feasibility of allowing satellite and terrestrial commercial operations in the 12.2–12.7-gigahertz (GHz) spectrum band. Doing so could expand broadband access and expedite mobile 5G network buildouts; however, incumbents worry that more commercial activity in the band may interfere with their satellite operations. How can the FCC expand use of this spectrum while navigating incumbents’ concerns?
To discuss
the future of the 12-GHz band, I sat down with two spectrum policy
experts:
V. Noah Campbell
, co-founder and CEO of
Radio Spectrum
Access LLC
, and
Richard Bennett
, founder of
High Tech Forum
and
a co-creator of Wi-Fi. Noah explained how both industry and the FCC can safely
increase commercial activity in the 12-GHz band, while Richard offered an
engineer’s perspective on what freeing up spectrum entails — both in the 12-GHz
band and beyond.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of our talk. You can listen to this and other episodes of “Explain to Shane” on
AEI.org
and subscribe via your
preferred listening platform
. You can also read the full transcript of our discussion
here
. If you enjoyed this episode, leave us a review, and tell your friends and colleagues to tune in.
Shane Tews: V., you have been interested in
the 12-GHz space for a while. What is your firm, Radio Spectrum Access, seeking
to accomplish by requesting the FCC consider increasing the use of this
spectrum band?
V. Noah
Campbell: We’ve been paying very close attention to this band for about three
years because it’s extremely unique: 500 megahertz of contiguous spectrum between
12.2–12.7 GHz. Not only is it a very deep spectrum position; it’s the only
terrestrially licensed frequency of spectrum that’s been auctioned and is
already licensed for terrestrial use exclusively between the sub-6-GHz
frequency and millimeter wave frequency.
So it’s a
very unique asset, and we think the usage it was assigned almost 20 years ago
when it was first auctioned is basically obsolete. We think that updating the
rules here could create a lot of additional capacity for mobile wireless. And
our advocacy before the commission — which thus far has been successful — is to
update the rules and bring this portion of frequency into the 5G era.
Richard, what is your engineering
perspective on the process of possibly clearing the 12-GHz band for additional
use?
Richard
Bennett: The NPRM gives you a pretty good idea of what’s going on. There are
three incumbent users in the 12-GHz band: Direct Broadcast Satellite (DBS),
which is the DirecTV and Dish Network satellite television systems with small
antennas on top of people’s houses; there’s SpaceX, who’s actually operating on
a provisional license in the 12-GHz band; and then there’s a service called
multichannel video data distribution service (MVDDS), which is a quirky one-way
transmission system used for things like remote broadcasting. The MVDDS
allocation is what’s primarily under consideration for redefinition of what the
terms are. These folks want to turn that into a flexible-use license rather
than the very narrow usage that it’s authorized for today.
Of course,
SpaceX is getting a lot of attention because it’s being touted as a potential
solution to the digital divide. But their system is actually running in three
different frequency bands, so it is possible in principle for it to surrender
its use of the 12-GHz band and concentrate on the other two bands, but they
don’t want to because they like the big fat allocation that’s in the 12-GHz
band — and they feel like their service is a pretty cool thing.
So the
commission is trying to figure out whether it can modify the rules that apply
to the three different incumbents, or whether they just need to start over and
create a whole new sharing framework. And the existing sharing framework is
like a lot of buildings you see in Washington, DC that appear to have had
multiple coats of paint slapped on it over a hundred years. There are
allocations on top of allocations, and it has some really strange conditions.
For example,
when you build an MVDDS system, you have to coordinate it with the existing
DBS. But once you’ve done that, if the DBS operator installs new dishes, they
have to be noninterfering with the MVDDS. So the priority rights are sort of first-come,
first-serve, and it probably would be good in principle to just sort of erase
it and start over. But that’s not the kind of thing the FCC does very well, so
I expect we’re going to see more incremental fiddling around the edges as the
commission explores the possibility of enabling some 5G access in the 12-GHz
band.
How do consumers stand to benefit if the
FCC does decide to expand the 12-GHz band beyond its current use?
V. Noah
Campbell: The demand for bandwidth in the US is massive and constantly
increasing. And so the consumer benefits here, I think, are really
straightforward. You can add a huge amount of capacity relatively easily and
quickly to the US 5G mobile ecosystem, and that has radical benefits for both
consumers and the greater competitive ecosystem. You don’t have to give
anything up if the engineering shows that you’re not going to impact incumbents.
How should the FCC and other entities that
want updated rules for the 12-GHz band move forward?
The truth
here is that you really don’t have to “nerd” that hard to figure this out. But
with that said, as Richard noted, the current coexistence regime is extremely
wonky. It takes three or four months, it’s paper-driven, it’s antiquated, and
our research indicates that the whole process could be compressed to three or
four milliseconds.
The other
thing to keep in mind is that this spectrum has some really inside-out elements.
Most of the services that the 12-GHz band incumbents seek to provide are
extremely rural services. Now, 12 GHz propagates much, much better than 24-GHz
and millimeter wave spectrum does, but this will predominantly be just like a
lot of other densification. This will be an inside-out band from a 5G services
standpoint.
So there’s
sort of a natural difference between the markets here and a pre-built-in
sharing regime within the band that just needs to be expanded on a little bit.
It’s not going to take crunching huge amounts of data over multiple years. This
can be done really quickly, and I think there absolutely is the political will.
This is not a partisan issue; it’s consistent across different administrations.
This NPRM was voted on and passed unanimously in the waning days of the Pai
FCC, and the Rosenworcel FCC has taken up the exact same language that was used
in the last administration.
So our ask
of the commission until January is very simple: Let’s take a look at this. We
should study it. It’s valuable and important enough for the country and our national
interests that we do so. And the FCC agreed unanimously to do so. They’re
looking for a win-win, which we absolutely embrace.
Our ask is
to be given a chance to prove the engineering — which we’re doing — to recognize
the economic and policy benefits. We’re very grateful to the commission for
opening this NPRM, and we’re very much looking forward to participating
robustly in the process.
So have we learned enough now? Are we at
the point where we just need to get the proof points to those who make the final
decision?
Richard
Bennett: Essentially, this has given us a really fine illustration of what the
FCC’s new mission is. So when it’s not playing about with largely symbolic but
fundamentally insubstantial issues like net neutrality, the FCC has the mission
of reallocating spectrum from old systems to new, higher value systems.
So the need
here is partially a technical model of coordination between incumbents’
services and 5G, partly a model of political and economic cooperation managed
by the FCC, and actually a new sense of what the FCC’s mission is — whether it
sees itself as a facilitator of advanced communication technologies emerging
from the lab and going into the marketplace where they can happily coexist with
incumbent services. That’s really what we want the FCC to be, and to the extent
that it can stay out of pointless fights like net neutrality, that’d be great
for everybody.
V. Noah
Campbell: The FCC is really good at this, and they’ve been doing it
successfully and leading the world at it for 40 years. So they really are a
model globally for how to repurpose frequency and update rules such that
frequency can be used more efficiently.
Any last thoughts?
Richard
Bennett: The one thing I’d like to say is that I hope Congress stays out of
this. I mean, looking at the kind of nonsense that’s happening on Capitol Hill
in terms of the definition of broadband as a symmetrical service, it’s like, “Duh,
look at any kind of engineering measurements.” You’ve got 10–15 times as much
download as upload on the consumer side, so why would you go out and spend
taxpayer money on services that nobody’s ever going to use? But on Capitol Hill,
that turns into a bidding war. So the hundred megabit-per-second symmetrical
crowd is bidding against the gigabit symmetrical crowd to see who can come up
with the most aspirational standard that will not really be future-proof,
because there’s no such thing.
V. Noah Campbell: Just to echo Richard’s point and what I mentioned earlier, I think the FCC is eminently qualified. They have a track record of global leadership in doing exactly what we’re aiming for here, and their engineers are world-class. We have total confidence the FCC will manage this appropriately and successfully, and we’re looking forward to it. And we’re very excited to be doing what we’re doing. We think we’re going to come out with a result that’s highly beneficial for all parties.