PAGE_TITLE: 
	What Would Happen to Consumers and the Economy Under a Progressive Regulatory Regime? | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

VIDEO
Event Summary
On June 9, AEI’s Phil Gramm and Federal Trade Commission (FTC) Commissioner Christine Wilson joined AEI’s Shane Tews to discuss ongoing progressive-led changes to antitrust enforcement and the FTC’s rulemaking procedures.
To begin, Dr. Gramm explained how progressives had already tried to enforce heavy-handed regulation in the 20th century, particularly in the transportation industry. Yet, these regulations harmed the average American to the point that then-President Jimmy Carter undid them, resulting in lower prices and a revitalization of American competitiveness. It then became conventional wisdom that consumer welfare was the primary purpose of antitrust.
Ms. Wilson concurred on the importance of the consumer welfare standard being the cornerstone of antitrust enforcement. Looking to the present day, she highlighted several red flags regarding the FTC’s regulatory trajectory. Under Democrat leadership, the agency is making politically driven decisions rather than relying on economics and the rule of law, which may cause the FTC to overstep its jurisdiction.
Dr. Gramm argued that changes to antitrust law must be ratified by Congress, not decreed by political appointees. Ms. Wilson added that within the FTC, current agency leadership is sidelining minority commissioners and keeping the public in the dark on the agency’s internal processes.
—Matthew Glavish
Event Description
Progressives are waging a Neo-Brandeisian regulatory crusade against America’s top innovators. From Big Tech to Big Agriculture, the White House, Congress, and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) are taking aim at so-called anticompetitive, monopolistic conduct that harms the economy to the benefit of a select few.
This trend contradicts decades of established legal doctrine centering on consumer welfare as the basis for antitrust enforcement. Do these claims of anticompetitive conduct have merit? How would American consumers and innovators fare under a more restrictive regulatory regime?
Join AEI’s Shane Tews for a conversation with AEI’s Phil Gramm (a former Texas senator) and FTC Commissioner Christine Wilson on how efforts to create a new antitrust enforcement regime in both Congress and the FTC could stifle innovation and harm consumers.
Event Materials
Event Transcript