PAGE_TITLE: 
	As Big Tech Grapples with User Data and Privacy, Consumers Benefit | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

After a year of congressional hearings and antitrust scrutiny regarding the alleged lack of competition in tech and social media, the ease with which
millions of users
have left WhatsApp in favor of alternative messaging platforms such as Signal and Telegram in recent weeks might be surprising to some.
via Reuters
The recent exodus from WhatsApp occurred amid public confusion over the app’s announcement of an upcoming update to its terms of service, which users would be required to accept in order to use the app after February 8. Despite the fact that Facebook added end-to-end encryption after it purchased WhatsApp in 2014 — meaning that the company could not access the contents of users’ messages — many
misinterpreted
the update to mean that they were being forced to share their chats or profile information with Facebook.
The update has since been delayed until May, and WhatsApp issued a
clarification
stating that the update “includes new options people will have to message a business on WhatsApp, and provides further transparency about how we collect and use data.” It also plainly states that the “update does not expand our ability to share data with Facebook.” However, as a result of the public’s strong negative reaction — which included Elon Musk
tweeting
“Use Signal” out to his 42 million followers — within days, Signal became the most downloaded app on Android and iOS, with Telegram coming in second. Telegram has been an interesting winner in this situation; while the media has lauded the fact that the app offers encryption, Telegram’s encryption is actually not end-to-end by default; the user has to turn it on manually.
Lost in the discussion around WhatsApp’s changes is the ease and speed with which Messenger customers have been able to switch from one messaging app to another. This is in stark contrast to the “locked-in” state that many politicians have described in arguing that it is difficult, if not almost impossible, for users to leave Big Tech platforms in the case of certain key features such as messenger tools. There are plenty of messenger options out there. While Instagram’s messaging features, WhatsApp, and Facebook Messenger are all owned by Facebook, users can adopt the aforementioned Signal, Telegram, or more well-known options such as TikTok and Snapchat with relative ease.
Then, in a further twist on January 28, Apple marked that most celebrated holiday — Data Privacy Day — by
announcing
that it would soon begin requiring “apps to get the user’s permission before tracking their data across apps or websites owned by other companies.” The company’s move is aimed at ensuring iPhone users understand what information they agree to share when installing apps. The company released a
report
emphasizing to users that the data collected about them is often harvested across different apps by third parties and aggregated into profiles linking the information back to users. This information is then used to tailor targeted marketing aimed at the user.
This change by Apple has put the company directly at odds with Facebook. As Bloomberg Businessweek
describes
it:
Such a move could undermine the efficacy of Facebook’s targeted advertisements. In December, Facebook took out full-page ads in a trio of U.S. newspapers saying it was “standing up to Apple for small businesses everywhere” by opposing the changes, which it describes as an abuse of market power. Facebook is considering filing an antitrust lawsuit against Apple, according to a person familiar with the company’s thinking.
But Apple’s interest in pushing
more transparency into the digital ecosystem is better viewed as an important
step in increasing accountability. Knowing how much data is being collected by
an app and the extent to which it is being sold to agents outside of the app is
important knowledge for users to have, regardless of how privacy conscious they
are. Understanding how information is being collected and used by apps is also
important for ensuring the security of a user’s data and possibly even their personal
safety too.
While it remains to be seen how exactly this clash between the tech titans will play out, ultimately this shift toward being more direct and transparent with users about privacy — be it about policy changes or app updates affecting the use of data — will be key for empowering consumers to make informed decisions about their data and their digital lives.