PAGE_TITLE: 
	Toward a Connected Future: Maximizing the Internet of Things | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Editor’s note:
The next president is in for a rough welcome to the Oval Office given the list of immediate crises and slow-burning policy challenges, both foreign and domestic. What should Washington do? Why should the average American care? We’ve set out to clearly define US strategic interests and provide actionable policy solutions to help the new administration build a 2017 agenda that strengthens American leadership abroad while bolstering prosperity at home.
What to Do: Policy Recommendations for 2017
is an ongoing project from AEI.
Click here for access
to the complete series, which addresses a wide range of issues from rebuilding America’s military to higher education reform to helping people find work.
The Internet of Things (IoT) is a combination of technologies: hardware devices, applications, and network operations that connect the physical world to the internet. In the coming years, as IoT connected devices become more commonplace,
tens of millions of cars, and tens of billions of cameras
, medical devices, home appliances, industrial systems, and other sensors will come online, enabling the flow of information between devices and consumers, businesses, and even governments. Homes could function more efficiently with connected appliances, entertainment, and security systems; cars could share information to their owner, manufacturer, or other cars; healthcare information could be processed more efficiently to individuals and medical professionals; and smart cities could allow governments to improve infrastructure using data analytics. In fact, a McKinsey
report
estimated that the IoT could deliver over $11 trillion in economic value by 2025, if businesses and policymakers are able to capitalize on its potential. But there are also risks. How do we maximize value and minimize the potential for harm when this universe of devices comes from thousands of different vendors and use multiple networks across the globe? Several members of Congress have offered constructive ideas on how to maximize the potential of IoT technologies, while keeping them safe.
Free market approaches to securing the Internet of Things
After the October 2016 cyberattack on Dyn that utilized devices connected to the internet to create a denial of service attack that took several internet companies offline for hours, Sen. Mark Warner (D-VA) sent a
letter
to several federal agencies asking for “expert opinions and meaningful action” on tools that can be used to “better protect American consumers, manufacturers, retailers, Internet sites and service providers.” Senator Warner’s point is a good one. We need to give consumers tools to make better choices that offer more security and privacy when investing in and engaging with IoT devices and the networks that connect them to the internet and cloud servers. Creating a policy framework that encourages investment in security and recognizes the importance of privacy is fundamental to the success of IoT technology. Security-by-design is a mantra in IoT policy circles, but to make it actionable, you need to have an understanding of the virtuous cycle of technology evolution that enables devices to come to the market consumer ready and easy to use.
IoT device manufacturers shouldn’t wait for direction from the government on security – they should consider the security and privacy of their customers as part of their design from the beginning. Our goal should be establishing IoT device best practices that are understood by both consumers and manufacturers. Sen. Ed Markey (D-MA) has proposed an Energy Star-like program that would create a voluntary cyber and data security certification program named Cyber Shield. This will help consumers identify responsible manufactures who adhere to agreed-upon cyber and data practices. “Security is hidden, so it’s hard to know if a device has good security features,”
notes Jason Hong
, an associate professor of computer science at Carnegie Mellon University. Manufacturers have sometimes prioritized ease of operation over forcing consumers to create passwords when they set up new devices. Developing a voluntary program with a label of recognition would help consumers make better informed purchasing decisions and help create a set of best practices for manufacturers. This type of free-market best practices approach would be a win for the industry and consumers alike.
On policies related to security, it’s important to consider that device manufacturers favor a best practices approach over a hardened security standard because the best practices approach allows them to constantly improve products as more information becomes available on how the product is used, and the manufacturer can continuously improve their technology for a better user experience. The ability to quickly enhance a product in the next generation, or by sending a software update, is an incentive for manufacturers to continue to innovate on ways to improve a product’s capabilities, and enhanced security is one of those key features. There is concern already that the European Commission, as part of its Digital Single Market strategy, will choose a specific path for the security standards of devices connected to the networks over a best practices approach. Light touch regulation is imperative to the growth and success of IoT.  All of the partners, both public and private, need to be encouraged to develop smart, adaptable devices that are intelligent and collaborative amongst industry partners, government, and individual consumers.
Modernizing networks for the Internet of Things
Technology creators and companies in a variety of industries, as well as governments, recognize that a network running through older telecommunications equipment will need to be modernized to allow the full potential of the Internet of Things to be reached. Sen. Deb Fisher (R-NE) introduced the Developing Innovation and Growing the Internet of Things (DIGIT) Act last year with Sens. Cory Booker (D-NJ) and Brian Schatz (D-HI). The DIGIT Act notes the importance of supporting wireless technology by assessing spectrum needs required to support the infrastructure of IoT.  Creating better infrastructure through the next generation of network capabilities with the advancement of 5G technology allows for more broadband-enabled technologies and devices and allows this digital transformation to scale. These  senators recognize the value of having the government be a partner in the progress of IoT by ensuring the spectrum needed will be there as we advance towards large-scale IoT deployment.
The Internet of Things will enable a world of new possibilities where information fuels new capabilities and opportunities on a massive scale. It offers individuals and societies more effective use of physical space, time, and resources. We need to encourage a comprehensive vision for IoT that allows both individuals and industry partners to be part of a comprehensive plan to take advantage of benefits of the technology while limiting unwanted risk. Congress is heading in the right direction by understanding the need to work together with companies and end users to ensure a positive and safe digital transition to this next generation of technology.