PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Road Ahead for Cybersecurity | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

What is the future of cybersecurity policy? How do we maintain the innovative Internet ecosystem, protect consumer privacy, and ensure national security? Last Thursday, the Center for Internet, Communications, and Technology Policy took its first steps towards answering those questions with its conference at AEI: “
After Snowden: The Road Ahead for Cybersecurity
.”
At the outset of the conference, Chairman Mike Rogers (R-MI) and General Michael Hayden (ret.) laid out the reality of current cyber threats. In the past decade, the frequency, scale, and intensity of attacks have continually increased. What started as simple distributed denial of service (DDOS) attacks have grown to damaging, costly actions – attacks designed to steal intellectual property or shut down the power grid. In the words of General Keith Alexander (ret.), who delivered the luncheon address, they began as disruptive, but, around 2012, became destructive.
Explaining the growth of cyber threats, General Hayden noted that the Internet revolution has resulted in the next great globalization action, pushing nations and individuals together. This global shift has enabled vast opportunities for innovation and the potential for dramatic economic and social growth. However, it carries with it challenges. States now have to respond to threat vectors from non-state actors, and, as Chairman Rogers suggested, individuals, simply by using their iPhones or computers, invite intelligence services, criminals, and terrorists into their living rooms with them.
So how should government go about defending individuals’ privacy and national security in cyberspace? Two key steps to lead us down the right path emerged from our conference: 1) we need more effective public-private partnerships with freer opportunities for sharing information and 2) the government needs to educate the public about cyber threats. Achieving these goals will require rapid, legislative action.
The success of any cybersecurity policy will hinge on the effectiveness of the relationships between government and industry and the open exchange of information between the two – as well as both inter- and intra-agency communication. Outlining the FCC’s cybersecurity strategy, Chairman Tom Wheeler emphasized that the foundation of FCC cyber policy will be to push industry to define a new paradigm. Companies, not government, should identify cost-effective and affordable best practices that protect consumer privacy and national security. Though solutions will differ across sectors and companies, these methodologies must communicate risks internally and externally. The government will support those efforts and monitor them, ensuring that they satisfy the risk requirements.
But there are also concerns about placing too much responsibility at the feet of private industry. Bob Dix from Juniper Networks, speaking on the panel, identified one such issue: never before has the government required companies to protect themselves from terrorists. General Alexander reiterated that point, drawing from his own military and intelligence experience: the Department of Defense protects all Americans, not merely military installations, so why should it not protect all Americans in cyberspace? He argued that government and industry should share information with each other on a regular basis, and, if government gives flawed information or directives to a private actor, that actor should be protected from liability for the mistake. In short, he placed the onus on government to ensure a mutually beneficial relationship with industry.
It is important to note that these views are by no means mutually exclusive. They each contribute to the overriding principles of security and innovation, but they highlight the underlying decisions we must make when developing cybersecurity policy. The FCC’s strategy builds upon the basic assumption that government is not as innovative as the Internet, so it must depend upon the proactive risk management practices of private industry. But how far does that dependence go? At what point must government step in and, when it does, should it support industry with resources and analysis or actively defend against and respond to attacks?
Beyond public-private partnerships and lines of communication, there is a basic need for better education about the dangers and potential of the Internet ecosystem. FTC Commissioner Maureen Ohlhausen, sitting on the panel, explained that over 80% of the cybercrime committed last year could have been avoided through better self-defense practices by individuals – or cyber hygiene, as some call it. The problem is that the public just doesn’t understand the risks. Chairman Rogers related a story of visiting with his constituents and discussing the issue of Internet innovation and threats with them. The majority of them, when they thought of their smartphones or smart meters, relished in the convenience each device afforded them, which makes perfect sense. After all, these devices were developed for that very reason. But they didn’t consider the risks they assumed by owning and using the devices.
Government can follow the route of the FTC, as explained by Commissioner Ohlhausen, and work to educate the public about privacy and security risks. An education strategy would require interagency cooperation in order to cover the various frontiers of cyber threats. If done well, it could achieve an excellent return on investment by preventing much of the cybercrime we see today.
Any effective cybersecurity policy must entail legislation, such as the Cyber Intelligence Sharing and Protection Act, which Chairman Rogers and his ranking member, Rep. Dutch Ruppersberger (D-CA) have championed. The interagency and public-private cooperation and communication discussed above will only happen if buoy
ed by law. As General Alexander explained, legislation should ensure that companies are able to share information with each other and with the government, while protected from liability. The challenge will be identifying the limits on that liability, on the extent of corporate responsibility, and on government engagement.
As our conference made clear, the road ahead is certainly not an easy or clear one. But we’ve taken the first step. Our generous speakers identified the current state of cybersecurity, the problems we must address, and possible solutions to those problems. We look forward to continuing this debate and seeking actionable, effective cybersecurity policies.
This post was originally published on TechPolicyDaily.