PAGE_TITLE: 
	Gen. Michael Hayden Calls for Comprehensive US Cyber Policy: AEI Project on Internet Strategy and Global Cybersecurity | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

From AEI’s
Global Internet Strategy project
As the US Senate votes this week on the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act, former NSA and CIA director
Gen. Michael Hayden writes
that, in addition to CISA, a much broader cyber space strategy is needed to deal with those who threaten US interests in the cyber domain by recruiting terrorists, oppressing freedom, harming the economy and threatening national security.
Gen. Hayden will give a keynote address starting at 8:45 a.m. this morning.
Among the key themes he will address: the need for an understanding that the private sector must take the lead in defining the future of the Internet; that the government must protect important assets from cyber disruption, that there is a need for the government to share information including with the business community, while being true to the free movement of ideas and other ideals that make up America. To watch the live stream, click
here.
This conference continues a multi-year effort to propose a comprehensive cyber strategy for the next administration.
The Global Internet Strategy project
is led by AEI scholars
Jeffrey Eisenach
,
Mike Daniels
, and
Shane Tews
, with the help of a
National Advisory Board
comprised of leading academics, business leaders, and former public officials. The leaders of the Global Internet Strategy project believe that the United States must take the lead in promoting Internet freedom, advancing electronic commerce, and mitigating threats to cybersecurity and network integrity. Substantial efforts must be made not only to protect and advance American national interests, but also to promote the spread of individual liberty, economic empowerment, and human dignity.
The project will highlight specific issue areas essential to US cyber security strategy with a series of working papers released throughout the winter of 2015 and spring of 2016 in addition to two comprehensive mid-term and final reports.
The first paper by AEI resident scholar
Claude Barfield
(to be released on Thursday, October 29, 2015) examines digital trade and cybersecurity. Please contact Matthew Devine at Matthew.Devine@AEI.org or 202.862.4870 for an embargoed copy of Barfield’s paper.
For more information about the Global Internet Strategy Project or to speak with an AEI expert please contact AEI media services at mediaservices@aei.org or 202-862-5829