PAGE_TITLE: 
	Digital Identities and Privacy: Time to Change How Domain Names Are Registered? | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Since the EU’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) was implemented in 2018, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) has struggled to balance GDPR-compliance (the law requires that certain information be obscured) with its contractual obligation to keep public the names and contact information of domain name holders for legitimate access by law enforcement and third parties.
ICANN is responsible for coordinating the database related to domain name addressing, known as the WHOIS, which holds the records and details of who leases domain names from registrars (businesses responsible for the relationship between registrants of a domain name and ICANN). Law enforcement, intellectual property and trademark owners, and security and academic researchers often use the WHOIS database to contact and manage the various parties responsible for the websites that populate the internet.
Since the GDPR’s passage, registrars have been concerned that continuing to make these data public may place them in a legally awkward situation due to the law’s potentially significant fines. Should registrars make data publicly available as required by their ICANN contract? Or should they redact the data to avoid any GDPR violations?
The problem with redacted WHOIS contact data is that it interferes with efforts to investigate and mitigate security threats and content ownership violations. Masking WHOIS contact data removes the contact information for the manager of a domain name. This directly reduces the number of domains law enforcement can target for conducting illegal activities and undermines security teams who use the WHOIS to identify domain name registrants who may use the same or similar contact information when responding to complaints that their domain may be hosting phishing scams, illegal or inappropriate content, or selling counterfeit or stolen goods.
Balancing the privacy of domain name holders and the ability of investigators to access crucial information becomes a serious security and legal challenge. Most of the energy of the ICANN multistakeholder process is currently focused on figuring out how to mask the right amount of data and grant access to legitimate parties while meeting current contractual obligations.
This challenge brings to light the reality that it is time to change how domain names are registered. Changes in technology and regulation around the globe have created an opportunity to migrate to a new system that can enhance transparency, accountability, and trust while ensuring the protection of collected data.
An identification system that also preserves an individual’s anonymity is a major next step in digital accessibility. A new digital identity ecosystem would start with an identity provider that could verify the credentials of an individual or business and issue a digital identity or identifier (name or number). Necessary records would be kept by the identity provider, while only the appropriate information would be shared with third parties as needed.
National governments and private-sector companies have shown interest in using digital identities as authoritative identity credentials. Once a digital identifier is linked to a validated person, the identifier could be used in many contexts: government services, banking, commercial transactions, and the registration of information in a database such as the WHOIS. Businesses could use digital identities to validate transactions and maintain a chain of custody for both physical goods and digital information flows.
A comprehensive digital identity framework would help promote a safer and more secure online environment by protecting data and ensuring that requests for access to data are appropriate. This would give ICANN’s contracting parties more control over their customers’ information and achieve a balance with their privacy compliance concerns. Taking the identifiable information of a “natural person” out of the equation meets the criteria of the GDPR regulatory regime because any request to unmask the personal data will require a request for access from an appropriate party.
Many ICANN-accredited registrars already provide privacy proxy services that keep certain identity and contact details from appearing in the public WHOIS database. Trustworthy digital identification and the move away from physical artifacts to create and maintain identities will allow for more digital interactions in which individuals can verify that they are who they say they are. A new digital identity service has both government and commercial viability for validating transactions, record keeping, and regulatory compliance. Instead of trying to fit old policies with new regulations, let’s hope innovators embrace technology to move us forward to a better, more productive way of using the internet.