PAGE_TITLE: 
	The FCC Takes Key Steps Toward Securing US Tech Infrastructure | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

On Tuesday, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) took
a key step to protect US critical infrastructure,
voting unanimously
to revoke
China Telecom America’s
permission
to provide services in the US. The FCC
found
China Telecom “is subject to exploitation, influence,
and control by the Chinese government and is highly likely to be forced to
comply with Chinese government requests without sufficient legal procedures
subject to independent judicial oversight.” It’s not clear how China Telecom
maintains security on its networks, how it protects customer data, or how it
responds to cyberattacks, as noted in this
report
on
Chinese equipment and services. The FCC noted this concern and raised further
the possibility that Chinese government ownership and control of telecoms
services “raise[s] significant national security and law enforcement risks by
providing opportunities [for the company], its parent entities, and the Chinese
government to access, store, disrupt, and/or misroute U.S. communications.”
Before the China Telecom vote, FCC Commissioner Brendan Carr
raised national security concerns
about Chinese drone maker
DJI, whose drones account for more than 50 percent of the US drone market.
Drones are used to collect data and high-resolution images in areas that are
hard to reach and safer to monitor via drone — for example, during telecom
tower and pole attachment inspections. Carr also noted these drones play an
important role in performance monitoring for American network companies’
critical infrastructure, meaning they have a front-row view of how components
of said infrastructure operate.
FCC Commissioner Brendan Carr, June 24, 2020, via Reuters
Carr’s comments affirm what we have known for some time:
China recognized the potential for exploiting the network vulnerabilities of
the connected world many years ago. China’s
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology
supports
research and development (R&D) by Chinese companies that enables and
promotes civil-military fusion in information and communications technology
(ICT). R&D and industrial projects created in close cooperation with the
Chinese military around communications architectures enable possible
intelligence sharing and data mining that our own Department of Defense
identifies as a potential national security threat. Indeed, the 2021 National
Defense Authorization Act
identified
44 military-affiliated Chinese companies with
products in the ICT supply chain. Congress has recognized that these
circumstances present serious questions as to how secure a network operation
can be if it relies on these companies’ equipment to facilitate critical
operations.
Congress has also
recognized
that Chinese government-controlled entities
undermine the interests of the US and pose a threat to American communications
networks. In recognition of these threats, Congress in 2019 passed the
Secure and Trusted Communications Networks Act
. This act built
on the jurisdiction afforded to the FCC decades ago and assigned it
responsibility for mitigating potential harms in our communications systems,
including equipment attached to broadband networks. The rules directed the
FCC’s Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau to publish a “
covered list
” of communications equipment and services
deemed national security risks. Equipment and services from Huawei, Hikvision,
Hytera, and ZTE are on the list as of 2021, and Carr is now seeking to add DJI.
“We do not need an airborne version of Huawei,” Carr
stated
, referring to DJI.
Understanding the nexus between the FCC’s equipment
authorization process and the crucial effort to protect US supply chains is
more important now that we have a more complete understanding — and concrete
examples — of how today’s more sophisticated malicious activities are executed.
President Joe Biden’s May
executive order
on cybersecurity urged departments and
agencies to do their part in upholding US cybersecurity and protecting critical
infrastructure. The FCC has been a stellar role model in this regard; in
addition to the China Telecom vote and Carr’s diligence on DJI, the commission
recently
announced
it would start accepting applications from
qualified internet service providers for a $1.9 billion reimbursement program
to “rip and replace” network equipment deemed unsafe. Adding DJI to the covered
list would apply the risk management framework of rip and replace to the FCC’s
Universal
Service Fund
(USF) — as USF dollars cannot be spent on equipment made by an
entity on the covered list — and would couple rip and replace with a larger
security evaluation of edge items connected to the network’s core.
DJI drones were also
added
to the Department of Commerce’s “Entity” export
blacklist in 2020. The FCC now has a chance to build on this designation and
bring conformity to the interagency process as part of a greater, more
comprehensive cybersecurity strategy. Potential threats to the foundations of
our network supply chain must be vetted to ensure next-generation
infrastructure capabilities are built on a backbone of secure equipment. US
policies around digital architecture must also facilitate next-generation
innovation that prioritizes security by design. We cannot wait until the next
major cyberattack to adopt enforceable regulations that protect critical
networks. Dependencies and vulnerabilities are native challenges to the technology
ecosystem; we must now enable policies that foster confidence in our
technological partnerships.