PAGE_TITLE: 
	Outcome Document Arrives Before the Doors Open for the NetMundial Conference | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Wikileaks has posted a
draft outcome document
created by the Executive Stakeholder Committee of the NetMundial Internet Governance conference to be held in Brazil April 23
rd
– 24
th
.  Before the first multi-stakeholder invited to attend had taken a seat, the organizer had already decided what principles they were going to agree to and a road map for implementation.
The main challenge of the document is this: while the principles may seem reasonable, even laudable, the roadmap for implementation has many challenges and potential hidden agendas. The Internet as a “Human Right”,access to information, free flow of data, freedom of association, expression, privacy, accessibility, etc., all sounds like principles we want to embrace.  And a governance process encouraged to be “open, participatory, multi-stakeholder, technology-neutral, sensitive to human rights and based on principles of transparency, accountability and inclusiveness”,sounds like a good idea we should be able to support.  But now I’m wondering who will have the capacity to implement all this pro-free rhetoric? Most likely, that job would fall to governments around the world. It would be up to them to let us know when we have hit our Internet Governance metric.
And what happens if someone doesn’t hit the mark?  If a country is lacking in one of these areas do they get a strike against them in the Internet Governance Forum book?  Or perhaps we get the technology rich countries to subsidize the technology poor countries to ensure the “human right”of Internet freedom.  That is where “capacity building”comes in, code for share the wealth.
Another topic of concern regards Internet surveillance. The leaked document suggests that mass and arbitrary surveillance undermines trust in the Internet and trust in the Internet Governance ecosystem.  The Executive Stakeholder Committee suggests that more dialog is needed on this topic at the International level using the UN Human Rights Council and forums like the Internet Governance Forum.  Great idea, I’d like a seat right next to China please.
In the Key Message summary it is noted, “All the organizations, forums and processes of the Internet Governance ecosystem are expected to commit to implementing, as well as explicitly adhere, to all the principles agreed in NetMundial.”   So we just went from an idea factory to a committed relationship.
Many of the items in the leaked outcome document are good aspirational goals.  It’s deciding on the path to achieve them that will be the major challenge for the multi-stakeholders engaged in this process.  Continuing to seek balance between governments, industry partners, content providers, and the end user will be an ongoing challenge.
One of the best attributes of the Internet is that it allows individuals to create our own path as to how we want to use the amazing tools the Internet provides.  It also allows technology companies and content providers to make their own decisions on hardware, software and applications .  We want to see the Internet and the economy that has grown up around it continue to flourish. The multi-stakeholder participants need to be vigilant about keeping the management of the Internet in an open forum where transparency is a key principle. All participants’ voices should be heard in the discussion on how to govern the Internet.  If NetMundial wants to have a positive outcome, it will allow the discussion to take place and allow the participants to be heard without having to conform to a pre-agreed upon outcome.
This post was originally published on TechPolicyDaily.