PAGE_TITLE: 
	Maximizing the Internet of Things: A Conversation with Senator Cory Booker (D-NJ) and Senator Deb Fischer (R-NE) | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Event Summary
On Thursday, AEI hosted US Senators Cory Booker (D-NJ) and Deb Fischer (R-NE) for a discussion on their policy reform efforts to maximize the potential of the Internet of Things (IoT).
Sen. Booker explained the numerous economic benefits of IoT technologies and emphasized his desire for policymakers to help, instead of hinder, innovation. He argued that the US must allocate spectrum effectively and keep privacy and cybersecurity concerns in mind.
Sen. Fischer emphasized the need for the US to maintain its position as a technology leader globally. She argued that government needs to step back to allow innovators to create the next wave of internet-connected technologies, as regulations can disrupt innovation.
The senators discussed with AEI’s Shane Tews how IoT innovations have helped their home states, the importance of making spectrum available to innovators, and privacy and security concerns. Sen. Booker pointed out the potential for IoT technologies to help state and local governments eliminate wasteful spending and improve the quality of their services. Sen. Fischer emphasized the need for liability protections to allow the private sector to share cyber threat information. The senators agreed IoT can bring tremendous economic benefits to the US and that government should help speed its development while keeping privacy and security issues in mind.
—Matt Au
Event Description
Online registration for the event is now closed. Walk-ins may not be accepted.
The next wave of internet innovation will connect billions of consumer devices, industrial sensors, geolocation tags, automobiles, cameras, and medical devices to the internet. Analysts estimate the potential economic impact of this Internet of Things (IoT) and related technologies will be between 4 to 11 trillion dollars per year by 2025. But are current policies and regulations helping to position the US to be the world leader in IoT technologies moving forward?
Join AEI for remarks from Senators Cory Booker (D-NJ) and Deb Fischer (R-NE) on their policy reform efforts to create a national IoT strategy. Remarks will be followed by a discussion with AEI’s Shane Tews on ways policymakers can help innovators and businesses working to bring interconnectivity to the economy and help ensure that IoT technologies remain secure.
Join the conversation on social media with @AEI on
Twitter
and
Facebook
.
Click
here
for event video.