PAGE_TITLE: 
	NETmundial Takeaways: The Importance of Keeping Political Agendas Away from the Internet | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Last week’s NETmundial conference on Internet governance went as well as it could have gone; not much happened.  No major global changes are expected, but the multi-stakeholder model of Internet governance continues to internationalize beyond ICANN and be adopted by decision makers across the Internet infrastructure.
Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff called for this conference after reports that her communications were part of the NSA leaks this past year.  Her hope was to use the NSA situation as leverage to diminish the United States perceived control over the Internet.
What happened this week was probably not what President Rouseff had in mind.  The principles that were laid out on surveillance match what is already stated in international law; that surveillance should not be arbitrary or unlawful.  The outcome document drafters also resisted the push by some to add controversial language regarding network neutrality.   Russia and Cuba were not happy with the final outcome document, nor was India.
Michael Daniels, special assistant to the president and White House cybersecurity coordinator said, “From the United States perspective, NETmundial was a huge success.”  I congratulate the U.S. delegation for working to prevent the inclusion of strong language on net neutrality and surveillance, and keeping the final outcome a rough consensus that is not legally binding.
Luigi Gambardella, executive chair of the European Telecommunications Network Operators association, the group that represents the largest Internet providers in Europe
commented
, “if you want a multistakeholder model you have to accept the idea there are be different views and different positions, and maybe find no consensus,”
Ambassador Daniel Sepulveda, Deputy Assistant Secretary at the Department of State and coordinator for International Communications and Information Policy for the U.S. said one of the major outcomes is a stronger world commitment to the multistakeholder process going forward.  The non-binding outcome document also called for protection of intermediaries and calls for cooperation “among all stakeholders”.   This shows hope for a positive outcome on next years decision on how to manage the transition of the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) contract away from the U.S. National Telecommunications and Information Administration.
International cooperation within the multistakeholder community engaged in Internet governance has shown they have the capability to reach consensus and the insightfulness to leave non-consensus issues off the table.  This conscious understanding is of vital importance when it comes to managing the technical underpinnings of the Internet architecture.  If we keep the Internet inventors in mind when we make decisions about the next steps of the IANA function, we need to adopt the discipline of those who attended NETmundial and keep in mind that the Internet is an agnostic tool that should not have the weight of a political agenda put on its shoulders.  Keeping the net “neutral” should mean keeping politicians and their agendas out of the core infrastructure of the web.