PAGE_TITLE: 
	Cyber Responsibility: Protecting Old Systems from New Attacks | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Target’s 2013 credit card data breach has reached a record $300 million in damages to the company. This should be a wake-up call for the private sector that information technology (IT) infrastructures need to be protected as assets that hold both risks and rewards. Managing IT systems and the sharing of data on corporate networks that drive modern businesses comes with great responsibility. As part of the company’s recent settlement with 47 states, the company is now subject to new court-mandated security procedures and must perform a full security audit of its IT systems. If Target had taken IT management seriously as part of its corporate responsibility and overall strategy and included both of these processes as part of its own internal asset controls, it could have saved itself hundreds of millions of dollars and a damaged reputation.
The Target breach and its fallout should be a lesson for companies that share data on their customers with third parties. As corporations realize both financial gain and efficiencies from the data they sell and share with their business partners, they need to have clear, responsible guidelines for IT management and data security. Companies need to realize their obligation to protecting consumer data is just as important as generating revenue from the same data.
Investing in technology is not always a priority for C-suite executives and is also not how most managers choose to spend their business budgets. Many companies handle cybersecurity situations as spontaneous fires without the fire drills. Designing procedures that support business objectives and provide for a strong cybersecurity position should be part of every business’ overall strategic planning process.
Companies that manage cyber incidents as they happen without a deliberate plan for protection are being naive about their real responsibilities and the costs associated with both the disruption and the potential fallout from any lost data. It is understood that most of these companies are not in the cybersecurity business, but they are fully engaged in business strategies that embrace digital tools to create new revenue sources, from selling to their customers online to selling their client data.
Senior executives should understand that cyber governance and internal controls on their digital assets are vital tools to protect the future of their business and embrace cyber risk management as part of their management responsibilities. A company’s incident-response plan can make the difference between a momentary slow down and a full day or weeks-long fiasco. The IT failures British Airways sufferedthis past week have cost them an estimated $100 million and created major flight disruptions. At the same time, they have demonstrated that managing new problems over old equipment can be more expensive than having a strategic plan that understands the importance of managing IT systems correctly as a key component of revenue generation for the corporation.
Cybersecurity investments safeguard the integrity and the availability of our most important information. Increasing the private sector’s visibility into its IT systems and improving incident response allow for more efficient risk reduction and a significant increase in security. Currently, reporting breaches and ensuring consumer data protections are limited to publicly traded companies and certain regulated industries. If we want to continue to benefit from technologies and the internet success story, we need to take cyber security threats seriously and protect the IT that allows for innovation and enhanced productivity. It’s not just the IT guy’s problem, it should be company-wide priority.
This post was originally published on TechPolicyDaily.