PAGE_TITLE: 
	Notes from ITU Plenipot 2014: Regulatory Structures Protect the Status Quo, Not Innovation | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Consumers are becoming steadily intertwined with their technology. No longer passive bystanders, consumers are now interactive participants that both contribute and use data. Rather than watching outdated traffic reports on the news, consumers now interact with apps like Waze that keep them and their fellow app users up-to-date on traffic patterns and problems. Rather than risk visiting a new restaurant sight unseen, consumers now read user-produced reviews on Yelp to determine whether a given venue is worth the trip. Innovative products like these allow users to opt-in and share information on many levels that is useful for both local communities and global interests.
These types of applications are fast, efficient, and usually free to the consumer. It is data sharing by consumers and careful regulatory balance that make these apps possible. However, if regulators were to apply outdated telecom laws to the application layer of the network, this valuable system could cease to exist.
One of the issues being debated during the ongoing three-week International Telecommunications Union (ITU) Plenipotentiary meeting in Korea is the underlying cost structure of interconnection. A number of regulatory regimes want to impose a
sender-party-pays
system, in which the parties transmitting data pay network operators for this transmission. However, this model ignores the rapidly growing and increasingly interactive Internet Protocol (IP) network, which does not need ancient tariffs set upon its speedy network operations to facilitate delivery of its services. In fact, a sender-party-pays system would destroy the value proposition inherent in interactive apps like Yelp and Waze; why would any consumer
pay
to upload the data that make these apps useful in the first place? Many of the regulatory attendees at the ITU meeting wrote in a
declaration
that telecommunications and ICT should be “viewed comprehensively, beyond the aspects of infrastructure and technology, to encompass economic development, enhancement of the quality of people’s lives and social integration.”  However, IP networks and infrastructure as they exist today are an integral component of ongoing economic development. Moving towards a fully integrated IP-based network is an important step to connecting the next billion users to this infrastructure. Attempts to reinstate the tarriff cost structure could derail the very mechanisms that are currently enhancing quality of life around the world.
Network virtualization will be another challenge to both domestic and international regulators. Virtualization allows users to capture more value from their network connection through a smartly designed system. This system allows for just-in-time delivery of technological uplinks that allow consumers and commercial users to momentarily purchase the exact technology they want, and in the amounts that suit their specific needs. Virtualization works through a smarter use of network assets, which allows consumers to use the network via cloud computing rather than through large, contracted amounts of reserved network capacity that most small businesses and some individual consumers may not be able to afford.
Network virtualization is more cost effective than traditional network systems. It allows for real-time software services to be available to consumers, not just large companies, and it allows for better cost models and a more agile, capable network. However, this new model of network operations is not going to make conventional regulators very happy. It’s much harder to levy regulatory charges, local taxes, and international tariffs on a dynamic, virtual platform.
Network virtualization also presents a better way to manage cybersecurity challenges, especially for small-scale users. Currently, networks tend to have security applications that capture few potential vulnerabilities past the point of entry onto a system. A switch to network virtualization would increase security beyond the firewall approach; these networks use embedded protective layers that can monitor and instantaneously deploy solutions for intrusions, malware, botnets and worms.
Today’s best cybersecurity measures involve flexible policies that permit network operators to address security threats using technical and legal means. Additionally, these measures allow system operators to share information on a voluntary basis without fearing liability and the threat of global cybersecurity treaties from international organizations, which could interfere with their immediate control of a compromised network or data system. Overall, these treaties do not facilitate faster remediation; rather, they threaten to slow down network operators’ ability to remove the causes of the problems they face.
Overall, delegates face a number of challenges as this year’s ITU Plenipot draws to a close. Prominent among them is the ever-present need to fend off regulatory overreach in the form of global charters, international tariffs, and security mandates. At a time when interactive applications, network virtualization, and cybersecurity measures continue to add momentous value to networks, it is of utmost importance that the ITU members and other international organizations do not allow for resolutions that could open the door for government monitoring, censorship of citizens, and value-destroying cost structures.
This post was originally published on TechPolicyDaily.