PAGE_TITLE: 
	FCC Commissioner Brendan Carr: A Progress Report on US Leadership in Next-generation Networks | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

VIDEO
Event Summary
On Wednesday, September 15, Brendan Carr of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) joined AEI’s Shane Tews to discuss the FCC’s leadership on 5G and broadband expansion.
Commissioner Carr stated that the FCC is making progress on low-income affordability programs while preparing for a commercial auction in the 3.45-gigahertz spectrum band. He added that continued spectrum auctions and increasing the power of certain spectrum bands would leverage existing resources to reach unserved communities. Commissioner Carr further noted that Congress has already allocated enough funding to close the digital divide “multiple times over” — funds he argued the FCC should use before Congress throws more money at the problem.
Commissioner Carr addressed the ongoing net neutrality debate, stating that social media companies — not internet service providers — pose the greatest threat to a free and open internet. He asserted that the FCC has a role in interpreting existing rules and regulations around online speech and that taxing Big Tech firms to fund broadband initiatives would help consumers and exact a fair share from the heaviest generators of internet traffic.
Commissioner Carr and Ms. Tews also discussed the importance of expanding telehealth, improving broadband mapping, and building consensus on Chinese national security threats.
— William Rau
Event Description
During an AEI event in March 2021, Commissioner Brendan Carr of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) outlined a road map for extending US leadership in next-generation networks — including 5G. To build on the FCC’s successes during former Chairman Ajit Pai’s tenure, Commissioner Carr laid out a spectrum auction calendar to open more airwaves for commercial use, called for continued infrastructure reforms, urged immediate action on the FCC’s broadband maps, and stressed the importance of improved broadband adoption strategies. Six months later, what progress has been made? And how will infrastructure initiatives from the White House and Congress influence these efforts?
Commissioner Carr joins AEI’s Shane Tews for an update on his March plan, followed by a discussion on how the FCC can further advance US leadership in next-generation networks.
Event Materials
Event Transcript