PAGE_TITLE: 
	Empowering Responsible and Compliant Practices: Bridging the Gap for US Citizens and Corporations with the New EU-US Data Privacy Framework | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

The
Data Privacy Framework
(DPF) presents new legal guidance to facilitate personal data sharing between US companies and their counterparts in the EU and the UK. This framework empowers individuals with greater control over their personal data and streamlines business operations by creating common rules around interoperable dataflows. Moreover, the DPF will help enable clear contract terms and business codes of conduct for corporations that collect, use, and transfer personal data across borders.
Any business that collects data related to people in the EU must comply with the EU’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), which is the
toughest
privacy and security law across the globe. Thus, the DPF helps US corporations avoid potentially hefty fines and penalties by ensuring their data transfers align with GDPR regulations.
Via Adobe Stock
Data transfer procedures, which were historically time-consuming and riddled with legal complications, are now faster and more straightforward with the DPF, which allows for more transatlantic dataflows agreed on by US companies and their EU and UK counterparts. On July 10, 2023, the European Commission finalized an
adequacy decision
that assures the US offers data protection levels similar to the EU’s.
The DPF represents a significant stride in facilitating data transfers between the EU, UK, and US. It fosters ease of international business operations by simplifying data transfers. However, the framework also bridges the gap between corporate and citizen interest by ensuring both benefit from enhanced data privacy and smoother cross-border interactions.
The new DPF guidelines can also enhance private data security. While these guidelines primarily focus on facilitating cross-border data transfers and ensuring compliance with data protection regulations, they inherently promote data security in several ways. DPF participants are expected to adhere to certain guidelines, including an assessment of data security practices that ensures companies take adequate measures to protect the data they handle. The guidelines also require organizations to update their privacy policies to comply with specific data protection principles. These include data minimization, purpose limitation, and security measures, which collectively contribute to better data security.
The DPF’s provisions for dispute resolution also indirectly promote data security. By addressing any disputes related to data protection promptly and effectively, data breaches and security incidents are managed and resolved more appropriately. Compliance with the framework obliges organizations to follow data protection best practices, which typically include robust security measures, encryption, access controls, and regular security audits.
As we move into the world of more data collection, retention, and data sharing—and as this data is used for artificial intelligence and large-language-model learning—it is also an important time to create clean boundaries for data sharing on citizens’ information. Under the DPF, US and EU citizens gain more control over their personal data. The DPF offers several benefits to US citizens including managing concerns about the transfer of their personal data to regions with less stringent data protection laws. All citizens covered under the DPF have the right to request access to, corrections to, and deletions of personal data and the ability to object to data processing. Furthermore, they can file complaints with data protection authorities if they believe their data have been mishandled.
While the primary objective of the DPF is to enable smoother data transfers, its requirements and principles inherently promote data security by emphasizing compliance with data protection measures and best practices. It encourages organizations to adopt a security-conscious approach to handling personal data, which contributes to the overall enhanced data security that has been lacking in our global data practices. Companies are still expected to ensure the security of data during its transfer, and the framework may recommend specific safeguards to achieve this.
US companies can register with the DPF through the Department of Commerce
DPF website
. Companies that previously self-certified compliance with the EU-US
Privacy Shield
can transition to DPF by recertifying their adherence to DPF principles, including updating privacy policies to reflect any change in procedures and data subject rights that are crucial for this transition. Businesses should develop privacy policies that identify an independent recourse mechanism that can address data protection concerns. To qualify for the DPF the company must fall under the jurisdiction of either the Federal Trade Commission or the US Department of Transportation, though this reach may broaden in the future.