PAGE_TITLE: 
	Are Privacy Laws Compatible with International Trade? Highlights from My Conversation with Nigel Cory | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

By Shane Tews
As countries
impose new requirements on data collection and governance, the flow of consumer
data between countries and business entities is becoming more restricted than
ever — making it difficult for companies to ensure they are in compliance with new
regulations. The ongoing challenge to keep up with regulatory changes often
means building expensive new compliance tools that could potentially dismantle
the business models of many data-driven global companies. What does the
regulatory landscape of today’s data governance world look like, and how can
businesses adapt?
Nigel Cory
, associate director for trade policy at the
Information Technology and Innovation Foundation
(ITIF), joined “Explain to Shane” to discuss how the patchwork of data regulations and privacy regimes across the globe is hampering digital trade and constructing more barriers to data retention across borders.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of our talk. You can listen to this and other episodes of “Explain to Shane” on
AEI.org
and subscribe via your
preferred listening platform
. You can also read the full transcript of our discussion
here
. If you enjoyed this episode, leave us a review, and tell your friends and colleagues to tune in.
Shane Tews: Nigel, to get started, give us
an overview of your research on data flows, digital trade, and data governance.
Nigel Cory: At
the moment, I’m focusing on the emerging set of policies countries are enacting
to support, restrict, or control the use and movement of data, especially across
borders. In pretty much every country around the world, policymakers are trying
to figure out how to adapt their legal systems to our data-driven world.
A central
point here is that many countries — some democratic, but many authoritarian —
associate the location of data storage with data privacy, data protection, and digital
development. And they do this for both commercial and national security reasons,
which, as supporters of data-driven innovation and digital trade, we think is
wrong and misguided for a number of reasons.
As we’re
seeing more countries enact these restrictions on the movement of data, we’re
being forced to confront questions about what type of global internet we want
to see. Do we want to see an open, rules-based, innovative one, or are we heading
towards a fragmented, less innovative, less competitive global digital economy
where each country has their tech national champions but largely exists behind protective
regulatory barriers?
In my report
last month on data localization, which is when countries force firms to store
data locally, we saw that in 2017, there were 35 countries that enacted 67 such
barriers. There are now 62 countries who have enacted 144 restrictions, with dozens
more under consideration. And it’s not just the overall number of localization
measures we’ve seen, but also that these restrictions are targeting a growing
range of data types from the mapping data used for self-driving cars and
e-commerce services, to the personal health and genomic data that’s driving
life-science innovation, to measures targeting financial payment and insurance data.
Together, this means it’s increasingly difficult for firms to operate across
borders and to collect and use data from markets and consumers around the
world.
Can you give us some examples of how
barriers to cross-border data flows are spreading globally?
The
clearest, easiest examples are in China — a world leader in localizing data and
restricting its flows. Data localization is one of many tools China uses to
essentially wall itself off from the global internet and protect its global
tech giants like Alibaba and Tencent from the likes of Amazon, Microsoft, and
others. This allows them to grow behind protective barriers then expand
globally once they reach a certain point of competitiveness.
One of the
clearest examples I use with policymakers about how this is shortsighted is
that the value of data comes from how it’s used, not where it’s stored. A clear
example of this is health and genomics data. Some incredible innovations depend
upon running clinical trials and user data from around the world. And if they’re
unable to transfer genomic, health, and personal data as part of that, they
can’t accelerate drug discovery, for example.
This is
what’s at stake in the breakdown in digital connectivity between the EU and US,
but it’s already sort of broken down with China. Given China’s use of data
localization and internet restrictions, it’s essentially cut itself off from
the rest of the world and the global internet the rest of us exist in.
Contextualize this for us as a trade issue.
What are the greater implications for international trade?
The trade
rules we have under the World Trade Organization are relics of the 19th century
and are just not ready for today’s digital 21st century. Meanwhile, domestic
regulations have emerged — some conflicting and restrictive, and some more open
and based on legal principles like accountability for wherever the data is
stored.
An idea I’ve
advocated to policymakers is on sectoral-specific agreements. But the issue
there is with ensuring there are sectoral bridges between countries and
regions. It’s actually an idea I’ve been recommending for health and genomic
data because, as I mentioned earlier, while health and genomic data are among
the most sensitive, they hold some of the greatest potential societal benefits (i.e.,
new drug discoveries and health treatments).
Private-sector
and academic researchers have constantly found that the European Union’s
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) is already cutting off and undermining
transatlantic health research. 20-odd percent of US-registered drug trials have
clinical trials in both Europe and the US. If those companies engaged in this
aren’t able to transfer data, those drugs and clinical trials are undermined
and we’re all worse off.
So it would
be far better if the two sides got together to enact common principles and
processes to ensure firms manage data reasonably, responsibly, and ethically, but
in a way that doesn’t undermine their ability to use it for broader societal
and economic benefits.
Talk a bit more about what’s been happening
in Europe recently with regard to privacy laws and their enforcement. For one,
Luxembourg’s e-commerce regulator just fined Amazon 746 million euros for a
GDPR violation.
Europe has
sought to seize what it sees as a first-mover advantage in setting what it
thinks should be the global benchmark for data privacy. But it’s done so in a
way that has created enormous problems. It’s restrictive and largely based on
geography. It is essentially supposed to be a single law for the entire
European Union, but we’ve seen it’s actually fragmented in how it empowers
individual data protection authorities in EU member states to interpret GDPR as
they see fit.
The further
GDPR moves into implementation and enforcement, the more issues and errors pop
up and make life hard for foreign firms that rely on global information technology
(IT) systems to manage data. They obviously don’t want to set up individual IT,
administrative, legal, and compliance operations in each and every market,
including in Europe. GDPR has moved ahead and put these very broad and
restrictive rules in place on privacy, but it’s only really coming to life more
recently — in the Amazon-Luxembourg case, for example.
The
Luxembourg case is both interesting and absurd in that it’s the first time a
data protection authority has interpreted a particular part of GDPR — in this
case about what constitutes lawful processing. It’s actually fascinating for a
number of reasons; one of them is that it actually goes to the heart of
targeted advertising. The activists argue Amazon shouldn’t be allowed to use
data to build behavioral profiles to offer targeted advertising; it should
simply be a service to buy and sell goods.
There was no
data breach or customer data lost. It was simply about how Amazon uses data. In
consequence, they were issued the largest fine under GDPR thus far, which Amazon
is understandably appealing since it sets a pretty worrying precedent that
could affect a core part of their operations, and sends a clear signal about
what other firms may face.
Bringing it
back to my favorite issue of delocalization: The potential for massive fines
drives localization because the uncertainty of the local law and whether firms can
transfer and use data in a certain way is so high that they have no choice but
to store data locally. That isn’t the case here with the Luxembourg example given
it’s about use of data, but more broadly, that’s a major fear for US firms
operating in Europe. And that’s what’s driving them to shift more data and
services within the region.
On the issue of Europe, tell us about the
two cases Austrian privacy activist Max Schrems has raised, and how they will
shape the United States’ approach to cross-border data flows going
forward.
Max Schrems
is an Austrian data privacy advocate who has filed successive cases at Europe’s
highest court about GDPR, specifically as it relates to data going into the US given
concerns about American surveillance activities. In response to these cases,
the US and Europe have enacted these legal frameworks for companies to transfer
personal data across the Atlantic.
To test his
case, Schrems chose Facebook. Obviously they collect and use a huge amount of
personal data as a central piece of their business model. And so what we had
last year was Max Schrems’ second successful case: The court agreed with him
about the nature of US surveillance activities, which they then used to
invalidate the EU-US privacy shield, which was the latest legal framework that
the two sides had enacted to allow cross-border data transfers for companies
like Facebook. Schrems II was re-litigating the initial point about European
citizens not having sufficient safeguards and remedies in the US against the
National Security Agency potentially collecting and using their data.
Now, US
firms will face an increasingly difficult environment if they cannot transfer
EU personal data to the US, because Europe has very few other legal tools for
them to use. The Schrems cases have also had huge repercussions for the EU-US
transatlantic relationship. They also have geopolitical ramifications; if the EU
and US can’t agree to work together on data transfers, what chance do they have
on working together to enact other rules and norms around data and global
digital trade to compete with China and Russia’s alternative models?
That point has
underpinned both cases and put EU-US digital relations in flux for a decade
now. It’s a matter of seeing whether the two sides can finally put something in
place that survives the inevitable legal challenges in Europe. And that’s still
an open question. It’s probably the Joe Biden administration’s number one
digital policy goal at the moment, but it remains a question mark.