PAGE_TITLE: 
	A Privacy-friendly Digital Wallet for Children: Highlights from My Conversation with Rick Lane | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

By Shane Tews
How can
children enjoy the groundbreaking innovations of the digital age with
sufficient guardrails around their personal data? What existing laws and
regulations aim to protect children online, and what steps must businesses of
all sizes take to comply with them?
On the latest episode of “Explain to Shane,” I was joined by
Rick Lane
, founder and CEO of Iggy Ventures, to discuss the importance of aligning the actual use of financial transactions by kids with the often-ignored regulations around children’s online privacy and data collection. Rick explained why he chose to advise and invest in
Rego Digital Architectures’
Mazoola
app (
now
available
for download) and their proactive programs that give parents better tools for managing kids’ use of credit cards and create online allowance accounts with rules that can teach financial responsibility while protecting the child’s identity. Mazoola is the only independently certified family mobile wallet that is compliant with the
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act
of 1998 (COPPA) and
Europe’s General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR).
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of our talk. You can listen to this and other episodes of “Explain to Shane” on
AEI.org
and subscribe via your
preferred listening platform
. You can also read the full transcript of our discussion
here
. If you enjoyed this episode, leave us a review, and tell your friends and colleagues to tune in.
Shane Tews: Rick, to get us started, tell
us what Mazoola is about and how it operates.
Rick Lane:
My involvement in Rego, the parent company, and the Mazoola kids’ digital
wallet really came about when Rego reached out to me to discuss how to protect
kids online. I’ve been volunteering my time on public policy issues, and they
wanted some advice about COPPA and this new area that they were launching into,
which was the digital wallet space. And so my conversation began by just
looking at what they were doing, and what I found was absolutely fascinating.
I found that
Rego had developed a COPPA-compliant fintech infrastructure from the ground up,
and their vision was to allow kids of all ages to engage in commerce online and
offline without being tracked. And that was something novel because most of the
cards and digital wallets out there targeting kids follow the
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA) privacy protection provisions, which is an
opt-out system based on your parents. Rego’s model is opt-in, and parents have
total control of a kid’s purchasing activities. That, to me, was a great way of
allowing kids to learn financial literacy with sufficient protections as
they’re getting more involved in this cashless society.
What does Mazoola’s compliance with COPPA
and GDPR look like in practice?
There’s a
specific process in place. When COPPA was created by then-Rep., now-Sen. Ed
Markey (D-MA) there was a goal of ensuring the new websites at the time were
going to protect children’s privacy. The ways to do it were either a completely
self-regulatory regime with no mechanism to check unless there was litigation,
or to create a process where the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) could certify
private-sector third parties by walking through and analyzing the processes of
companies engaged in collecting information on children and targeting children
online so they can then become COPPA certified.
That
certification process is very robust. And Rego went through that entire process.
So the FTC went through and made sure every aspect of the collection, use, and
storage of a child’s information was within the boundaries of COPPA’s
regulations. Rego had a few earlier attempts at this that didn’t pan out,
because there really wasn’t as much focus on the collection and use of kids’
data on the financial transaction side as much as there was on sites like
Instagram, Facebook, or Twitter. Most parents also never thought about it. Most
people don’t think about opting out of how their information is being used.
This is a
relatively new phenomenon where because of COVID-19, we’ve moved to a much more
cashless society. Kids don’t carry much cash. Parents are getting these debit
and credit cards. You see a whole host of companies out there targeting
children and teens because the market is huge. But the big difference between
Mazoola and our competitors is that we collect no personally identifiable
information on a child at all.
Social
security numbers, first and last names, dates of birth — all the information
that data brokers collect on us is being collected on our kids. Under GLBA,
unless you opted out of how the information is going to be used, that information
is sold. Think about this — and again, I didn’t until talking to the Rego
people — you’re able to combine the financial transactions of 14 and 15
year-olds — sometimes even younger — plus all of the information they’ve put on
Facebook and Instagram and all the other data collected on their web browsing
histories. This is a powerful amount of information. But now it’s even more so
because we’ve moved to this cashless society and kids are using debit and
credit cards all over the place. What really attracted me to Rego was that they
were in the middle of solving this public policy problem with a new
technological solution that was built from the ground up. That’s a very unique
situation to be in in this town.
I’m a big proponent of the US enacting a
federal privacy law, because I think we’re making it too tough for companies to
figure out state-by-state how to comply with all the guidelines, especially
when talking about mobile. So how is the current patchwork of privacy laws
compliance-wise for a small startup like Mazoola? Did it affect your ability to
get the product rolled out?
Actually,
no, not for us, because we’re under COPPA. So in a weird way, COPPA is our
federal privacy bill. So the more macro discussions of federal preemption and
private rights of action were already resolved in 1998 when COPPA came about.
So we are fortunate in that we don’t have a lot of state law conflicts because
we’re under COPPA or, as some financial services are, under GLBA, which has
also usually been carved out of some of these state laws.
So we’re
kind of in an interesting spot in that even if there is a change or an
enactment of a federal privacy bill, we just can amend our model to comply. And
you’ve seen this with a bill from Markey and Rep. Kathy Castor (D-FL) to amend
COPPA to increase the age for data collection eligibility up to 17 from 13 —
which would make it similar to GDPR — and to include financial services
transactions as part of the information that falls within COPPA’s realm.
The other
thing that’s also important is in regards to data breaches, which is somewhat
connected to the privacy debate. There is a ton of evidence of kids getting
caught in these data breaches. The beauty of Mazoola is that if there’s a data
breach, no information on the kid will be collected. So you’re protecting a
child not just from collection and use of their data by the data brokers out
there, but you’re also helping to protect them against use of their data on the
dark web.
What future developments should we keep an
eye out for?
I think in
this space, it is possible revisions to COPPA. Markey (the original author),
the chair of the Senate Commerce Committee, the ranking member of the House
Commerce Committee, as well as Democrats and Republicans on both sides of the
aisle agree that COPPA needs to be updated.
So that is
going to happen, in my view, probably sometime next session. There is just too
much momentum for it not to. The stumbling block may be that someone wants to
try to tie it to more macro privacy legislation. But as I mentioned earlier,
COPPA is its own separate entity and doesn’t have some of the outlying issues
that a general privacy bill would have to in order to get it over the finish
line. So you could amend COPPA in a way that doesn’t bring in some of the other
privacy and data breach issues.
It’s not
just Congress that is looking at this, but the FTC as well — the entity that
oversees COPPA. And they too are noticing that there is this new world order in
the fintech space that is targeting children and does not fall under COPPA. So
that’s another interesting place where you could see some discussions happening
here in Washington, DC.