PAGE_TITLE: 
	Telecom Supply Chain Security and 5G: Highlights from My Discussion with David Stehlin | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

What makes 5G wireless networks different from previous telecom networks? Why is supply chain security so important for 5G? And with global supply chains, how can we ensure both transparency and quality? David Stehlin, CEO of the Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA), joined me on the latest episode of “Explain to Shane” to discuss how industry is ensuring the highest possible standards for the next generation of telecom connectivity.
Below is an abbreviated and lightly edited transcript of our conversation. You can listen to the podcast
here
and read our full discussion
here
. You can also subscribe to the Explain to Shane podcast on
iTunes
or
Stitcher
, or download the podcast on
Ricochet
.
Shane Tews: There are so many bits and parts to the
networks, so I would imagine that supply chain quality management and having a
consistent set of quality expectations across the telecom supply chain are really
key to building the next generation network. Is that correct?
David Stehlin: Yes, very much so. And we all know that
5G is not just your next 4G, it’s not just more bandwidth or faster video
downloads for your cell phone, it’s a pervasive change in the network. The
large service providers today typically will operate eight to 10 to 12
different networks because they might have some specifically for consumers and
some for enterprises, wireless and wireline, some just for back haul, some are
for certain types of enterprises. Each and every one of these networks requires
its own set of products, its own set of management tools, its own team, and
it’s very difficult and expensive to manage multiple networks. 5G allows
service providers to squeeze a lot of networks into one, or maybe they’ll not
get all the way down to one network, but they’re certainly going to go from 10
or 12 down to maybe two or three networks, so they’ll be much more efficient in
how they operate.
That’s the good news. The bad news is that now you
have much more running on the one network, so you have more risk of bad actors
getting into the network. That could be through a critical IOT [internet of
things] device, your router in your house, your connected HVAC system, or your
car, all these things become at risk when they get more and more connected.
On top of that, the industry is moving from
proprietary network products to more open source network products. The US
government is very supportive of open source because it gives the opportunity
for our creative engineering talent in the United States to go out and create
new services and new products and new parts of this coming 5G network. That’s
fantastic, but how do you manage that risk? Because now you have to stitch
together all those different parts in the network, each and every place that
you have an access to the network, a critical IOT device as I mentioned before
or a switch or router, whatever it may be, you allow a bad actor to come in and
perhaps do harm.
Let’s just take a step back to make sure that I’m
clear on this. When you say they’re taking kind of multiple networks and
creating one network, are they using new technology to streamline into a base
network that then can be upgraded? They’re getting away from these individual
networks that have been created for other specific uses?
That’s right. 5G is much more than upgraded RAN [radio
access network] equipment out of a cell tower. And as I said, it’s much more
than more speed. It’s fiber much deeper into the network. It’s moving data
centers out to the edge of the network, closer to you and closer to shopping
malls and business centers and things of that sort. And they’re doing that
because 5G and some of the services that will be enabled in 5G require very,
very low latency. Latency is in many ways tied to distance. If you have to back
haul everything to this very large hyperscale data center that might be 50
miles away, the time it takes causes latency in the network and you can’t have
high-latency operation if you’re going to do something like autonomous and
connected cars.
Okay. Let’s go ahead and go into the open source, and
one of the favorite buzzwords on Capitol Hill right now and in the industry is
ORAN. Can you walk us through that?
Sure. ORAN is open radio access networks. Today there
are really three or four major RAN players, major 5G players around the world,
Nokia, Ericsson, Samsung, and Huawei. None of those, of course, are US
manufacturers. While Samsung and Ericsson and Nokia have facilities here and do
a lot of business with the US service providers, none of them are based in the
United States. We have determined, and the US government has determined, that
5G is of strategic importance to our future. So we need to have more strategic control
over 5G networks in the United States.
Historically, a service provider will buy a whole
system from an equipment manufacturer. If you’re a service provider X, you
might use Nokia in half of your network and Ericsson and the other half of your
network for example, but then you’re restricted to use only those types of
gear. Because technology is changing so quickly, the intent of ORAN and the
ORAN Coalition is to allow providers of other types of services, typically
software-based, to come in and provide the software component of the network.
RAN is obviously the radios that are up on a tower or up on a light pole, but
it’s also the software that controls things. Historically a service provider would
buy both that software and the hardware from one vendor. Open source allows the
service provider to buy software from one vendor or perhaps multiple vendors
and the hardware from somebody else.
What is TIA’s role in all this?
We do a couple things. We help enable new
technologies. For example, I mentioned that we’re enabling 5G by creating a
standard related to edge data centers to help lower that latency. But our role
in this specific opportunity is to create a new supply chain security standard.
We’re going to take the best of many standards that are already out there, but
are not specifically built for telecom, and merge them together and layer on
top of what’s already been built. A telecom-specific standard will ensure that
every component in the network, every product in the network, every system on
the network is transparent and are trustworthy. It’s a combination of, is that
chip coming from the vendor you think it is? And is that chip a trusted chip?
Secondly, the standards will evaluate manufacturers.
Many times these equipment providers will use contract manufacturing. They’re
not building it in their own factory. Well, is that manufacturer trusted? Is
the equipment provider using software that is in fact trusted? Most equipment providers
will not only make their own software, but they will buy stacks and build upon
those stacks. What’s the whole history of that stack of software? And when you
link all these things together, you have to do so in a way that’s transparent
and verifiable, and you create a series of elements that are locked down and
can’t be changed.
We will put a digital fingerprint on all the major
critical elements in the network and then perhaps use something like blockchain
to ensure that it is secure. We’re bringing together our members and others,
industry experts, to create this new supply chain security standard. The intent
is that we will have draft one of it out this year and that by the middle of
next year it’ll be a released standard. And if you know anything about
standards bodies, that’s extremely quick.
I know that the US government is also very engaged in
this, between DHS [Department of Homeland Security] and NIST [National
Institute of Standards and Technology] and work that’s going on in the
Pentagon. How are you incorporating sort of the work that they’re doing in
supply chain with the TIA efforts?
Yeah. First of all, we’re in dialogue with all of
them. The Department of Commerce, DOD [Department of Defense], DHS, the CMMC
[Cybersecurity Maturity Model Certification], we are in discussions with each
of them. We’re not trying to recreate the wheel. We’re trying to take the best
of each of those elements and merge them together into what makes sense for
telecom. And we want it to be something that’s manageable, that’s not so
overbearing and overarching that it doesn’t get deployed. It has to be something
that’s workable, and that’s why we are focused on a standard that is
process-based. What we do is we’ll go back and check how the processes are in
place. Can you prove that that chip came from vendor X? Tell me where every
element in that software stack came from. And then you merge these things
together and you create a series of metrics and those metrics can then be
benchmarked.

One of the things we do
with the current TL 9000 standard is everybody that is certified and is part of
TL 9000 submits monthly data on the quality of their products into an
anonymized database. How many problems they had during development, how many
problems they had during the manufacturing, when it was deployed, how quickly
did they fix those problems. That data then gets anonymized and creates a
benchmark. Now if you’re a member or a service provider, you can look at the
benchmarks and see best in class, middle of the road, and worst in class, and
you as a vendor can see how you stack up versus the others. That benchmarking
is something that’s really important to continue to raise the bar.