PAGE_TITLE: 
	Australia’s Standoff with Big Tech: Highlights from My Conversation with Bronwyn Howell | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

By Shane Tews and Bronwyn Howell
Facing a
new law
requiring social media firms to pay Australian news providers for their content, Google was willing to comply after brief opposition, but Facebook blocked all news content on its Australian platform for two days. Why did the two companies approach the issue so differently, and what will Australia’s law mean for the future of tech regulation?
To offer first-hand perspective from “down under,” AEI Adjunct Scholar
Bronwyn Howell
joined me from Wellington, New Zealand to share her insights on the regulatory dilemma Australia has unraveled — both for itself and the rest of the world.
(Note: Since this episode was recorded, Facebook
reached
a multiyear deal with News Corp. for access to its Australian news content.)
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of our talk. You can listen to this and other episodes of “Explain to Shane” on
AEI.org
and subscribe via your
preferred listening platform
. You can also read the full transcript of our discussion
here
. If you enjoyed this episode, leave us a review, and tell your friends and colleagues to tune in.
Shane Tews: Bronwyn, tell us what’s going
on between Google, Facebook, and the Australian government.
Bronwyn
Howell: A couple of weeks ago, the Australian federal government passed a law
which would require Big Tech firms — notably Facebook and Google — to negotiate
with select media companies in Australia on a code for the latter to be
compensated by tech companies who take news content and use it in their own
apps or services.
This would
apply, for example, to the news that shows up in Google’s search function, and
to news that Facebook’s users either post or repost — so long as the news came
from one of the Australian firms that the law applies to.
The
government’s justification for forcing this negotiation code came from an
inquiry about two years ago that concluded Big Tech had market power in advertising.
But the code tries to establish a link between that alleged market power in
advertising and copyright breaches that would occur when Big Tech firms either
share or allow sharing of forbidden content — Australian news, in this case. This
is interesting because there’s two different ways in which these Big Tech
companies use that content, and it’s a really long bow to stretch between the
finding of market power in the advertising market — which has made Facebook and
Google a target for regulation — and the issue of needing to compensate media
firms that have generally struggled in international markets. It thus seems really
difficult to have a standard, one-size-fits-all code for negotiation.
Talk to us a bit more about the advertising
market, because it seems like there are a few different things happening there.
Again,
the argument is that Google and Facebook, by using that content, are enhancing their business models, thereby being able to sell advertising better. But the issue here is that the traditional media companies also are now online, and they also sell online advertising. So the end goal for intervention was to compensate media companies for their content in order to make up for declining advertising revenues — which have allegedly been lost to Big Tech firms with vast market power.
But of
course, this model of newspapers using advertising revenue to compensate for
the creation of news — or to fund news content — is as old as newspapers
themselves. There has always been a two-sided market in publishing where
advertising has subsidized content. The Google and Facebook piece is only a
secondary issue, because even before Google and Facebook existed, we were
seeing the revenues of these companies reduced because of the copyright issue —
in which people could take easily videotape televised content and repost it,
for example.
The news
companies provide what the Australian treasurer calls “public-good journalism.”
And since that’s being reduced because of media companies’ struggle to bring in
revenue, they’re looking for ways to prop up that industry. So they’ve basically
latched onto the fact that Google and Facebook could be tagged or taxed in
order to help subsidize the creation of Australian news content.
One of the
pieces
you did for AEI cited public opinion data showing that Australians overwhelmingly supported this move by the government. Why do you think that is?
There’s a
general trend internationally that frames Big Tech as somehow the enemy of the
state. And I think when the enemy of the state is also located in a different
country, it’s possible to play off a number of different prejudices. The
general thought is that Big Tech is bad, but that Big Tech companies that are
foreign are “badder” than Big Tech companies that are not foreign.
The politics
have become complicated as well, because it can’t just be seen as a simple
battle between good and bad — or the little Aussie battler against the big evil
giant from overseas. It’s got these other issues going on as well about who’s
eligible to be negotiated with. The Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission (ACCC) — which launched the market power inquiry in 2018 — is also mixing
up the markets in deciding why this should be the way for compensation. It is
quite complicated.
Why did Google come to the table so much
faster than Facebook did?
Yes — the
two firms have very different business models. Google has total control over
what content its searches yield. So to the extent that the code exposes Google
to liability, it can choose to use or not use content from the identified media
companies. Facebook, on the other hand, is much more limited because it’s less
able to control what content is posted. Any user can post a piece of content that
breaches copyright. But if Facebook’s algorithms then pick that up and
redistribute it, they now become financially liable for the original content’s reproduction
and retransmission, creating uncapped liability. The original breach of
copyright was not governed by Facebook; it was controlled by the user who
posted the content.
Facebook thus
argues that this code creates an extremely difficult, unkempt liability if they
have to negotiate over regulating content whose posting and sharing they fundamentally
cannot control. And while algorithms can be used, they can be very imperfect
because they’re just taking the best-guess stab at picking out what might be a
breach. Furthermore, the only way for Facebook to insulate itself against this
massive liability was to not carry Australian news content at all.
Ultimately,
where Facebook can’t control the instances of breach because it’s the end users
that do it, Google can. This likely led to Google being more amenable to enter
into a deal with the content providers. So one can look at Facebook’s “unfriending”
of Australia a couple of weeks ago as an example of how good their algorithms
weren’t
. They were very blunt: In order
to take the risk-averse strategy, they applied an algorithm to cut all
Australian content and, in consequence, ended up cutting out legitimate
material — from the government’s COVID-19 experts, for example.
Going forward, what should we keep an eye
on?
Facebook and
the Australian government struck a deal that gave Facebook more time to enter into
agreements with the big media firms (which, as noted above, has started
happening). In exchange, they’ve given the ACCC more discretion in deciding
whether the contracts that have already been struck meet the expectations of
the various parties. And arbitration will only be required if it’s believed the
voluntary contracts do not meet that objective.
But the big
Australian media companies are strongly unionized, which is how they got the
Australian regulators to act on this in the first place. If the companies know
Facebook isn’t going to voluntarily offer a deal that they like, the big media
firms can thus fall back on the arbitration option — which they know will force
Facebook into something less amiable.
It’s going to be very interesting to watch just what those contracts are and how they’re struck, because there’s lots more game-playing that could still ignite another standoff. This is far from resolved at the moment; it’s really just been kicked down the road.