PAGE_TITLE: 
	5 Questions on Strengthening US Cybersecurity with Rep. John Katko (R-NY) and an Expert Panel | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

By Shane Tews
On June 11, AEI hosted a web event on strengthening US cybersecurity in the digital age. I was joined by
Rep. John Katko
(R-NY), ranking member of the House Homeland Security committee, for a one-on-one conversation, followed by a panel discussion with
Ginny Badanes
,
Laura Bate
,
Klon Kitchen
, and
Andrea Limbago
.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of key highlights from our discussion. You can view the full event on
AEI.org
and read the full transcript
here
.
Shane Tews: Rep. Katko, walk us through
your approach to cybersecurity for this particular Congress.
Rep. Katko:
It’s remarkable how much things have changed in the homeland security realm
throughout my time in Congress. When I first got here, ISIS was all anyone was
thinking about. But ISIS is now rendered to a much lower threat level for the
United States. International terrorism is still an issue, but the new terrorism
and new preeminent threat is really cybersecurity — the ransomware attacks we
have seen and everything else that’s going on. We had HAFNIUM, SolarWinds,
Colonial Pipeline, and the recent attack on our beef infrastructure in which
they admitted to paying an $11 million ransom. It’s going to continue to
escalate, and our critical infrastructure is a real problem.
First, we
should continue rethinking our fragmented approach to .gov security by
consolidating security with the Department of Homeland Security’s (DHS)
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA). CISA has to be the
quarterback of the .gov domain. Second, we have to have them working with the
private sector as well to develop our understanding of the nature and extent of
third-party risk. We then need to reduce this risk through certification
regimes instead of just creating perfunctory compliance exercises. Certification
regimes that have some teeth and substance will be really important for driving
better software assurance and development processes across the system.
Finally, we
need to impose real costs on cyber adversaries like China, Russia, North Korea,
and Iran. We know the group that hacked Colonial Pipeline was from Russia. It’s
absolutely inconceivable that they were a rogue operation there; there’s no way
the Russian government didn’t know they existed and what they were up to. And
if we don’t have and convey strong responses, there’s no deterrence.
Ginny, how does disinformation tie into the
government’s cybersecurity responsibilities? Talk to us about some of your work
on that topic.
Ginny
Badanes: When the team I work for at Microsoft first started up, our focus was
on nation-state actors, largely in response to what we witnessed around the
2016 election. But frankly, this was ramping up all around the globe. And there
were some well-known actors — many of whom Rep. Katko named — who were actively
trying to impact the results of elections, or at least the way people thought
and interacted with one another, using disinformation campaigns. And a lot of
those were coming from abroad. They were coming from other nation-states who
were looking to interfere.
I’ve been
incredibly impressed with how CISA has taken on these issues very quickly. They
quickly pulled together their disinformation site around the election and had
the rumor control site up and running. Sure, Microsoft and others could have
done that kind of function, but CISA was the appropriate landing place for
that. There was also strong trust there; CISA was working closely with state
and local governments when they built out that rumor control site.
Often,
industry is out ahead of government on technology and other issues. But there
are areas in which I’ve been really impressed by recent government innovation —
including CISA being a leader on the disinformation issue.
Klon, now that the Department of Justice
(DOJ) has begun treating ransomware like terrorism, how is our cybersecurity
strategy poised to change?
Klon Kitchen: This distinction is largely a bureaucratic response, but that doesn’t mean it’s not important and impactful. DOJ essentially decided that internally it would begin operating and coordinating ransomware investigations in the same way they do terrorism investigations, which essentially means a lot more internal information sharing and DOJ maintaining strategic oversight of various investigations that are better understood as part of one coherent challenge. DOJ is approaching ransomware in the same way they would think about terrorism as not a series of one-off investigations, but rather an issue with common roots that needs to be considered comprehensively.
Let me spit
a couple of metrics that underscore the scale of this and why DOJ is having
this response. In 2020, nearly 2,400 US government, health care, and school
networks were shut down by ransomware. The average downtime of one of those
attacks was 21 days, but the average recovery time — the time it took to actually
get back up and running the way they were prior to the attack — was 287 days. $350
million was paid in the United States in ransomware payments in 2020. That’s a
311 percent increase from the prior year. The average sum of one of those
payments was $312,493 — a 171 percent increase over 2019. So when we say
ransomware concerns are growing and that they’re significant, that is not
hyperbole.
A final
point: Reiterating what Rep. Katko said, there is no scenario in which the
United States can secure itself in terms of its cyber interests absent a deep
integration of the private sector at the policy and strategy levels. We are all
over the same barrel, and I think both industry and government are recognizing
that. We used to only make each other’s lives more difficult, but now, the pain
point has become so sufficiently acute that we are meaningfully trying to find
new ways to work together.
Andrea, give us some background on the work
you’ve been doing with supply chains. How does that tie into our
discussion?
Andrea Limbago: Supply chains are so interconnected with cybersecurity. I think it’s increasingly really hard to disconnect the two when everything is so hyper-connected both economically and digitally. And so in order to really figure out what some of your risks are in the cyber realm, you also need to know what your risks are across your supply chain given the huge increase we’re seeing in third-party attacks. In addition to cloud security, we need to expand our focus to: Who are your suppliers? Who are your partners? Who else has access to your data? SolarWinds is a great example of this: Even if you didn’t have SolarWinds software, you still might have been drawn into the scope of the attack via your more extended network.
A core
problem is that a lot of companies know their first-tier and initial suppliers,
but not their second-tier, third-tier, and so on. Because of the
hyper-specialization of components, you have to go down and start mapping to
those other tiers to actually know where some of your risks might be. Some more
forward-leaning companies have been looking at this for a while, but for the
most part, COVID-19 was a wake-up call in this and so many different areas. It
really pushed supply chain from sort of an esoteric, niche discussion that not
many people really cared about to headline-level news now.
It’s only
getting more complex, but at Interos, we’re trying to help simplify things
through “supply chain mapping”: providing that visibility and surfacing how the
cybersecurity and interconnected components add to that risk.
Laura, you’re a senior director for the
Cyberspace Solarium Commission, which released a major report last year
recommending a number of cyber-related policies for Congress to follow. One
year later, are the policies you recommended actually coming to fruition? Where
is more progress needed?
Laura Bate:
Yes — we are seeing updates in a number of areas. And the real credit goes to
Congress, who is really taking the bull by the horns here. Rep. Katko, in
particular, has been a fantastic champion for cybersecurity throughout the
course of the commission’s work. So we’re very grateful for that, and for all
of our congressional commissioners who are putting these ideas to practice. We
think the recent executive orders on cybersecurity represent good progress. There’s
also quite a bit in the US Innovation and Competition Act that relates to our
work.
But I think we
should also be looking at cyber diplomacy: how to engage with our allies and
partners. The Cyber Diplomacy Act is moving through Congress right now and
could have a lot of bearing on making us more effective in thinking through how
we as an international community can put critical supply chain elements in
trusted countries. It doesn’t necessarily all need to be in the US. There are
plenty of places with comparative advantages that would work, so we should be
utilizing that.
We also need
to be thinking about how we invest internationally via investment finance
corporations and the international arms the US has to further development,
whether it’s a function of investment or just aid. We need to be thinking strategically
about: Where are the countries that we trust? Where are our partners and
allies, and how can we be advancing things that are critical to the community
of nations that want a free, open, interoperable, and secure internet? How can
that whole community of nations be structuring things to encourage a secure
supply chain?
The answer
is: Yes, we’ve made great progress. (Thanks, Congress.) But there remains a lot
to be done.