PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Future of Intellectual Property Policy - COVID-19 and Beyond: Highlights from My Conversation with Michael Rosen | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

By Shane Tews
Intellectual
property (IP) has been a hot topic given the Joe Biden administration’s support
of a proposal to waive the World Trade Organization’s (WTO) Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) for COVID-19 vaccines and
treatments. Some argue IP protections incentivized vaccine manufacturers to
produce what are now the world’s antidotes to the pandemic. But others say
these protections are slowing down global vaccination and distribution rates —
especially in developing countries. Why did the administration take this
stance, and what might this signal about its approach to other IP issues?
AEI Adjunct Fellow
Michael Rosen
joined me on “Explain to Shane” to discuss the state of US IP policy, what the administration’s TRIPS waiver stance means for the future of innovation and public health, and how this issue acts as a proxy for the challenges of IP innovation in technology.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of our talk. You can listen to this and other episodes of “Explain to Shane” on
AEI.org
and subscribe via your
preferred listening platform
. You can also read the full transcript of our discussion
here
. If you enjoyed this episode, leave us a review, and tell your friends and colleagues to tune in.
Shane Tews: Mike, to get us started, give
us some background on the TRIPS waiver proposal at the WTO.
Michael
Rosen: In October 2020, South Africa and India filed a petition before the WTO to
suspend or waive these TRIPS rights as they relate to COVID-19 vaccines,
treatments, and other COVID-related matters. It’s a little ambiguous what that
means exactly, but it certainly is meant to cover vaccines. The idea is to essentially
suspend the rights of the pioneering vaccine companies to enforce their patents
and other IP protections.
The idea is
that this would enable generic manufacturers to also produce vaccines, get them
out faster, get them out cheaper to the rest of the world, and manage to end
the pandemic even sooner than under the current regime, which involves these
select companies who pioneered and developed the drugs selling them. So that’s
the basic idea: stop their patents, put them on hold, allow other generic
manufacturers to make the drugs, distribute them quickly, and solve the
problem.
The
charitable answer for why this was proposed — and I think there is a lot of
truth to it — is that India was ravaged by one of the worst COVID-19 outbreaks
in the world and unfortunately did not have enough shots to vaccinate its 1.3
billion people. But there are other explanations as well involving the fact
that India and South Africa are the leading countries for producing generic
drugs. And what they’re seeking would actually bestow a windfall on the generic
industries. So it’s not necessarily coming from a place that’s misguided, but
there are other interests there besides just solving the pandemic that’s raging
in their countries.
Does this proposal seem likely to give us
leverage over the problem at hand? You’ve written several pieces for AEI’s Tech
Policy Daily on why you think the Biden administration is wrong to support the
proposal, so what are your thoughts?
The problem
with the waiver proposal is that it does too much that’s bad and too little
that’s good. First of all, it will take up to at least the end of this year
before the WTO in a consensus fashion can actually make progress on this
proposal. It’s a long, slow, bureaucratic process to get one of these types of
waivers through the WTO. So even though at the beginning of May the Biden
administration signaled that would support this motion, there’s still a lot of
opposition — especially in Europe, Australia, and Japan.
And according
to what’s been reported, it’ll likely take until November or December for the
WTO to actually reach a decision on that. By that time, of course, the worst of
the raging pandemic in India and other places around the world will have passed
and hundreds of millions of vaccine doses will be created by them.
But it’s not
just that. Even after a process has been approved, it will take a significant
amount of time for these generic manufacturers to get off the ground, test
their products, and obtain the necessary regulatory approvals that they’re as
safe and effective as the branded Pfizer, Moderna, etc. vaccines. Even then,
the main problem in developing countries right now is not so much the lack of
vaccines — although that is a problem — but the lack of infrastructure in terms
of supply chain and logistics to get these medicines in the hands of people who
need them. We’re talking about in many cases — with Pfizer, at least — deep-freezing
capacity, refrigerated or frozen trucks, and transportation. So there are many,
many bottlenecks for both the vaccines and raw materials.
The real
problem here isn’t that patents are preventing people from being vaccinated;
it’s all these other conditions. And that’s where I would say it just does too
little that’s good to actually waive these protections.
The supply chain is always in there
somewhere. Talk more about how that plays into this.
That is
indeed going to be a problem — not so much for the pioneering drug companies,
but for those who are trying to copy what they’re doing, and even more so for patients
who are going to be receiving these doses that may not be properly tested or arrive
on time if they can’t get the supply chain and all the associated know-how to
go with it.
Some who
are, I think, on the more extreme side of this debate would say: Not only
should Pfizer, Johnson & Johnson, AstraZeneca, and Moderna have to suspend
their patent enforcement rights, but they need to be compelled to affirmatively
hand over all of their know-how and trade secrets about how to actually make, supply,
and distribute these products to generic manufacturers.
And it’s
interesting because Moderna actually agreed last year to not enforce their own COVID-19
vaccine patents. So from their perspective, this is kind of a non-issue because
they’ve agreed very altruistically to give up their patents until this pandemic
ends. But the waiver would go far beyond that because there are other patents related
to the mRNA vector for developing that technology. Since those patents would
also fall by the wayside, we could go way too far in that regard.
Also, Moderna
was literally facing bankruptcy. It went all-in investing billions of dollars
in this mRNA technology. Had it not succeeded as it did — thank God — that
company would have gone under. It’s very easy, as some activists do, to paint
with a broad brush this concept that Big Pharma is evil, profit-hungry, and money-mad.
But in fact, these companies are taking real risks with real dollars from real
investors. And without the promise of some kind of return there, we wouldn’t
have these breakthroughs. It’s that simple: It’s not the place of governments
to say who has made too much money.
But the
bigger problem isn’t so much these companies’ future earnings; the problem is
for the next pandemic, which we have to assume is going to happen at some point.
What’s going to happen when the next set of vaccine pioneers expect that even
when they come up with a terrific cure, they’re going to have to suspend their
patents? It’s going to give innovators and investors pause to know they could
be pouring billions of dollars into developing and testing these cures only to
have it taken away. That’s where, in my view, it does too much.
So you’re essentially saying the success of
a company like Moderna — which almost went under — speaks to why we need IP-related
incentives on the horizon?
Yes,
absolutely. That’s what our system is all about. Our system of IP protection
and innovation relies on a risk-reward benefit in exchange for disclosure. And
to me and many who oppose this waiver, there are concrete and effective steps these
companies and western countries can take to end the pandemic much faster that don’t
involve waiving patents. For instance, the companies can be encouraged to
manufacture more doses even faster. And I think because of the threat of the
waiver, they are feeling pressure to do this (although there are raw materials
constraints).
Even more
so, this is a golden opportunity for the US, UK, and others to engage in
vaccine diplomacy. This is a great opportunity for the government to spend a
few tens of billions of dollars on doses and give them away where our influence
can be felt to create a sense of gratitude to the US — and also because it’s
the right thing to do.
And yes, it
will be expensive. There’s no question, but when the Biden administration is
talking about spending $1.9 trillion on a so-called infrastructure plan, tens
of billions of dollars to actually help put a final nail in the coffin of this
pandemic and bolster US influence and strategic goals around the world is a
no-brainer. And if the vaccine manufacturers are willing to provide these at
cost or at a small markup, this is great bang for the buck for the US taxpayer.
More generally, how are we doing with IP
rights in the technology space?
I think the
IP regimes in the US — whether on the patent, trademark, or copyright side — are
certainly imperfect and there are important ways we can fix them. I’ve been
writing for as long as I’ve been associated with AEI about different patent
reform measures and ways the system could be improved.
The same is
true on the trademark and copyright sides: There are always ways to make the
system better, and Congress, the courts, and practitioners like myself should work
hard to make that happen. But the basic trade-off in all of these systems
between disclosure to the public of how technology works in exchange for a limited
monopoly is a bargain that should never be trifled with in its basic, most
fundamental sense. And we do that right in the US. We do it right in Europe and
Japan. There are ways to improve it, but challenging this system fundamentally in
the sense of “all information needs to be free” is not helpful. It only
undermines innovation and creativity.