PAGE_TITLE: 
	Technology Needs Continued Innovation Not Constraining Regulation | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Most developers understand that it is best to start with an open platform, not an outmoded system, when designing new technology. Working from such a foundation fosters innovation and allows developers to create new programs and applications that could enhance the on-line user experience. Just as an open platform supports development, the ability to innovate unconstrained from static regulation is a fundamental element of advancing technology. For this very reason, the Internet runs on technical agreements through Request for Comments, or RFC’s, within the Internet Engineering Task Force rather than through regulatory bodies at the International Telecommunications Union.
One needs to look no further than the introduction of the smartphone to understand how this country’s culture of innovation enables groundbreaking technological advances that change the lives of hundreds of millions of individuals and grab market share in a very competitive landscape. As we know now, the smartphone revolution enabled the explosion of the “app economy “which has vaulted consumers into the driver seat of the 21
st
century digital economy, helping them become more organized, efficient, informed, and entertained than ever.
Developers do not typically create software based on regulatory requirements; rather, they orient their efforts towards solving a specific problem or providing functionality not otherwise available to consumers. So why should regulation created for an industry built decades ago govern their designs? Allowing regulations to dictate how new programs will operate and be delivered runs counter to the principles of technological innovation. A developer who sees a more efficient way to run a program often catalyzes many future technologies. Consider, for example, applications that share application programming interfaces (API’s). Their developers don’t have to re-invent that basic platform. They can build upon it to communicate information within the device’s operating system, while others choose to use proprietary information specific to their operating system’s needs.
Requiring the developers of the innovation economy to adhere to decades old telephone company regulations is a large step in the wrong direction for technology advancement. Potential obligations to regulatory burdens like federal, state, and local reporting requirements, service level agreements, direct consent agreements, and privacy regulations could be an expensive and cumbersome burden to both large and small start-up technologies. Not to mention the deleterious effects of subjecting innovative businesses to the tariff regimes of an analog business model that is struggling to move forward into a digital world.
This outmoded regulatory regime would likely require potential investors to follow major regulatory obligation checklists in conjunction with any financial plans. This burden may include meeting new compliance obligations before launching a new product and then continual reporting post-launch. Of course, each change of political administration could bring with it new, unexpected obligations. It sounds like something designed for lawyers, not innovators.
Regulation has a long history of taking the innovation out of many industries, so the technology industry clamoring for old school, analog monopoly rules to guide new innovation networks and applications is like asking for a legal pad instead of a blank canvas to create a new technology opportunity. Why let past analog rules develop our digital innovative future? Let’s let the Internet economy thrive and continue to be our creative engine as we move towards the future unfettered by the guidelines of the past.
This post was originally published on TechPolicyDaily.