PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Dynamic Internet Marketplace at Work: Consumer Demand Is Driving Google and Yahoo Encryption Efforts | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Last week, Google and Yahoo
announced
that they will both be creating secure, encrypted, spy-free email services by early next year.  The idea is to make it harder for both hackers and government officials to read users’ emails.  In other words, Google and Yahoo are placing a secure envelope around the open emails that you probably have assumed were already protected.
Encryption is a no-brainer. We all need to become part of a secure Internet ecosystem, and this move by Google and Yahoo represents great progress in training (and allowing) end-users to manage their own security online.  I therefore applaud the effort and look forward to the Internet giants implementing even more tools to keep our communications safe from hackers and governments. Hopefully the next step for these companies will be to train their over 600 million users in multi-factor authentication, a tool that would add another level of protection.
One reason e-mail has not been encrypted until now is that there has not been market demand for it.  Consumers did not know that their emails were vulnerable, or perhaps they simply did not think they were all that interesting.  Now we live in a post-Snowden world where serious attention is paid to who is seeing what and why.  This may have the positive effect of Internet operators differentiating their levels of security services and email providers seeing real value in offering something more than free email connected to an ad network.
Facebook has also made the headlines in recent days, however for less flattering reasons. Because someone finally read the cumbersome terms of service for the Facebook messenger app and noticed that you permit the app to use your mobile device’s microphone and camera, some are arguing Facebook is spying on its users.  However, a close reading reveals that this was not actually a Facebook requirement, but something needed in order for the app to
smoothly cooperate with the mobile device
.  The device operators realize that such synergy is necessary for optimal functioning of the app, and that this device-app communication requires approval by the user.
Part of this device-app communication is done to convenience the user, as it allows the mobile device to interact with the app to “pre-fetch”information the user has indicated he or she wants, such as newsfeeds of current articles.  Of course, the other thing your device is doing is sending anonymized information such as location data, calendar information, preferences in music, and shopping habits back to the app provider (and possibly the mobile device operator). While some people find this tracking of end users creepy, others realize the opportunity it brings for better decision-making by both businesses and end-users. Tracking and monitoring your own activities is rapidly growing more popular, the explosion of wearable fitness devices and health apps being just one example.
This brings us back to the task at hand: securing the data. Utilizing the vast amount of data that flows across our networks for both personal use and societal benefits has huge potential, but we need to also understand the dangers of sharing.  What we need is transparency in the system so that we know who is collecting what. For now, consumers should adopt a simple guideline: buyer beware.
This post was originally published on TechPolicyDaily.