PAGE_TITLE: 
	“Right to Repair” Could Be a Trojan Horse for Chaos | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

The US government is headed in the wrong direction on device security for consumers. The Joe Biden administration’s recent
executive order
on “promoting competition in the American economy” includes language requesting the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) review “unfair anticompetitive restrictions on third-party repair or self-repair of items.” In essence, this means forcing manufacturers to change their rules and allow anyone to fix consumer devices of all sizes and functions. This initiative, called “right to repair,” has reached Capitol Hill after circulating in state legislatures for years.
via Twenty20
The idea of allowing technical devices to be repaired by
anyone may sound “pro-consumer.” But, like everything in tech, it gets
complicated quickly. Consumer technologies in today’s digital market tend to be
“plug and play”: Consumers can operate a brand new device without needing to
understand how its underlying technology functions.
The devices consumers enjoy, such as automobiles, computers,
medical and mobile devices, and home network systems, are designed with an
integrated, simple user interface. Behind the user’s screen are hardware parts
and propriety software — constructed by thousands of hours of engineering — and
specific patented designs from the original manufacturer. The administration’s
proposed regulatory change would mandate that anyone should have access to the
original parts, copyright manuals, and software design without imposing guidance
on the importance of training technicians — or how third parties could be held
responsible for damaging the device’s hardware or underlying software.
A device’s hardware and software designs are key to
protecting and securing its data. Given how much of our personal and digital
account information is linked to mobile devices, this area alone should give
policymakers pause. Do we really want to grant anyone access to the inner
workings of key pieces of equipment to both consumers and the digital economy?
A consumer wanting a device fixed quickly is understandable. But attempting a
quick fix — which is not guaranteed to be cheaper or easier — should not mean
potentially opening a device to the loss of security or data.
To be able to perform repairs on a specific device, many
manufacturers insist on the training of outside repair shop technicians to
ensure quality work by a sanctioned repair store. (This includes Amazon, Apple,
General Electric, John Deere, Microsoft, Samsung, and Tesla.) Knowing employees
have skills through training and certification is important for consumers before
handing over a device full of personal data. However, unlicensed right-to-repair
advocates claim investing in employees’ certification and training on device
operation is too expensive and time intensive.
Any regulatory change should not construct a legal means to
force companies to hand over design schematics with intellectual property
rights protections or grant access to diagnostic tools that could expose
consumers to data theft and fraud. As TechNet Senior Vice President Carl
Holshouser
argues
, the problem may not lie in an initial repair, but
rather the spyware and malware vulnerabilities created when a device becomes
accessible to third-party tampering. Holshouser urges the FTC to focus on
consumers’ ability to trust product repairs done by businesses with training
and qualifications to ensure proper — not just quick — repairs, along with the
need for an educated understanding of how product features interact with
software and applications to ensure device safety and security stay intact.
Recent
reports
that operatives from Israeli spyware firm NSO Group
sold software that exploited mobile device operating systems should also signal
to policymakers that software designs need maximum protection. NSO Group’s Pegasus
software slipped onto targeted mobile devices via a software weakness in both
the iOS and Android operating systems, allowing the program to access data from
contacts, calendars, and text message history. The creators of WhatsApp and
Telegram
called
Pegasus a “real and present danger to all of us.”
WhatsApp even
sued
NSO Group last year for sending 1,400 users malware
despite WhatsApp’s end-to-end encryption capabilities.
Pegasus demonstrates a continued threat to device security
despite cybersecurity experts spending years looking for vulnerabilities in
end-to-end encryption. Imagine what could result from access to a device made
deliberately or indirectly vulnerable by a cheap repair job, thanks to a
regulatory demand making source code and patented design schematics easily
accessible. As FTC Commissioner Christine Wilson recently
noted
, the ability to make repairs should happen “without
compromising data security, privacy, safety, and other legitimate goals
advanced by manufacturers.” The FTC should heed Wilson’s warning and consider
how the right to repair could potentially degrade, destroy, or compromise
devices.
The research and design phase of both hardware and software
is key to American digital innovation. Once we break it, it is difficult to
fix.