PAGE_TITLE: 
	What Exactly Is Government’s Role in Addressing Misinformation Online? | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Social media platforms’ ability to target content and advertising to specific audiences and facilitate the rapid sharing of information has revolutionized advertising and provided great benefits to consumers and the online and offline economies. Unfortunately, those seeking to spread political misinformation and propaganda online leverage these same capabilities, as has been well publicized in headlines and congressional hearings of the past year. In July, Axios published a
white paper
floated by Sen. Mark Warner (D-VA) listing 20
regulatory options
for “fighting politically oriented misinformation, protecting user privacy, and promoting competition.”
Via Twenty20.
Sen. Warner is looking to create effective laws and regulations that require social media companies to detect and suspend disruptive “fake” accounts and delineate these from genuine advertising and personal use. The challenge tech companies face is separating “real” from “fake,” but policymakers too face a daunting challenge in trying to structure potential regulations in a way that achieves the goal of mitigating political trolls while protecting free speech and vibrant entrepreneurship on the internet. Here are a few of the proposals in the white paper that caught my attention.
Detecting and mitigating “fake news” or information that has been fabricated or manipulated as part of a paid for propaganda campaign is challenging for everyone in the internet ecosystem. Bad actors take advantage of the internet’s decentralized architecture, which allows them to conceal themselves using tools designed to enable and protect free speech.
One of the proposals in the Warner paper is to “make platforms liable for state-law torts (defamation, false light, public disclosure of private facts) for failure to take down deep fake or other manipulated audio/video content.” Distributors of fake news are currently able to spread their disinformation in part because websites are under no legal obligation to actively remove false or defamatory content. “Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act [means that] internet intermediaries like social media platforms are immunized from state tort and criminal liability.”
Changing this status quo would effectively require companies such as Google, Facebook, Twitter, and Amazon to have a proactive plan to stop the spread of content that includes disinformation on their platforms. This liability would also extend to companies such as Verizon, Comcast, and AT&T, requiring they monitor the transport of raw data across their networks and to each other due to their liability for its content.
The white paper also puts forward a stronger form of this liability, which would classify internet service providers (ISPs) as “information fiduciaries” for their users. While tort liability mainly requires a mere “duty of care,” the concept of information fiduciaries “would stipulate not only that providers had to zealously protect user data, but also pledge not to utilize or manipulate the data for the benefit of the platform or third parties.”
Another suggestion put forth by the Warner white paper is for federal standards of “algorithmic auditability,” which “would require service providers to provide consumers with the sources of data used to make algorithmic determinations or classifications” in such a way as to be “evaluated for efficacy/fairness . . . as well as for potential hidden bias.” These standards could be used to analyze how botnets take advantage of algorithms that organize posts as part of their disinformation campaigns, as well as the more organic spread of fake news. Such a requirement would raise questions about what it means to evaluate the efficacy, fairness, or bias of an algorithm — many of which are created through machine-learning techniques without strict human guidance.
The obvious overarching question here is how to distinguish between bots and “real” users and between “inauthentic” and “authentic” accounts. But who will be the arbitrator of that decision? And how can companies or government agencies make these classifications while preserving citizens’ anonymity, should they choose it? The white paper does acknowledge political problems — such as encouraging totalitarian governments — that legislators would have to navigate in constructing legislation along these lines. But there may be further unintended consequences domestically.
The white paper’s suggestion that ISPs be liable for state-law torts is among the most significant, as it would amount to a repeal of Section 230. Yet there are already laws and regulatory actions, such as the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, that enable legal entities to take down illegal or false information. Finding a way to add to these existing protections in a way that enables our democracy to thrive while combating malicious actors is a tough challenge.
Sen. Warner and staff’s efforts should be given credit for starting a needed dialogue, but the big challenge moving forward will be finding a balance between protecting democracy and protecting freedom of speech. The internet is not the cause of the problem, it’s just the most recent tool being used in a long-running game of control by those interested in manipulating citizens.