PAGE_TITLE: 
	Inside a Cybersecurity Training Firm: Highlights from My Conversation with Keith Peer | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Cyberattacks
are one of the largest threats facing society today. Learning how cyber
disruptions take place is the best way to protect services provided by network
operations and data systems, but who has the training resources and expert
teams required to detect unseen risks for enterprise, government, and civil
society?
On the
latest episode of
Explain to Shane
, I
was joined by Keith Peer, head of
Offensive Security
’s federal practice, to hear about new
cybersecurity training offerings tailored toward the unique challenges of today’s
digital threat landscape. Offensive Security is a leading cybersecurity
organization that provides state-of-the-art coursework, training exercises, and
certifications on systems penetration testing for the federal government and a
number of Fortune 500 companies.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of our talk. You can listen to
this
and
other episodes
of
Explain to Shane
on AEI.org and subscribe via your
preferred listening platform
. You can also read the full transcript of our discussion
here
. If you enjoyed this episode, leave us a review, and tell your friends and colleagues to tune in.
Shane Tews: Keith, explain what “offensive”
cybersecurity looks like in today’s context.
Keith Peer: Our company, Offensive Security, is focused on two things: producing
Kali Linux
distribution and cybersecurity training, which consists of penetration testing and both offensive and defensive cyber operations. Penetration testing is where you assess the security vulnerabilities in an application or particular target. There’s also red teaming, which is going after a target inside of an operation. So it would not just be finding the vulnerabilities in an application; it’s actually using those vulnerabilities going all the way through to a particular target inside that organization.
Our students
learn how to do penetration testing, assessments of applications, and looking
for vulnerabilities—in some cases all the way from applications to developing
their own toolsets to perform those actions as well.
Let’s talk about training. If someone wants
to get involved in the cyber world, what types of training and certification do
they need?
Lots of
certifications are really entry-level. Our 100-level content is a little more
advanced than having just graduated out of college or high school. But when you
want to embark on your cybersecurity career, it’s a little more advanced than
that. You should have some prerequisites done by then. Those could be the
classic CompTIA courseware, information technology (IT) fundamentals, A+, and
Security+. We then have a track for penetration testing that is well-respected
in the industry and among stakeholders as demonstratively valuable. I say that
because of our unique pedagogy and testing.
Our
comprehensive training accumulates in a robust, 100-percent practical, hands-on
test where you have to demonstrate the skills and mindset you have learned over
the course in a real-world environment and be able to write about and document it
as well. We have a lot of Fortune 500 customers, as well as across the federal
government.
When it comes to the Internet of Things
(IoT), what level of security do we need on devices that we integrate into a
larger system?
Historically,
the threat landscape has revolved around IT systems. Now you’re moving into IoT
systems, and sometimes those IoT systems enable operational technology (OT)
networks to have communication that typically was not available. These OT
devices were managing pumps and switches, and everything else that they managed
was done manually. Now, they have the ability to be internet-enabled, monitored,
and controlled.
I consider a
mobile phone an IoT device. It’s connected to a network, but it’s portable;
it’s unique. All those devices—whether it be mobile, IoT devices, or OT devices
that are now enabled because of IoT devices and IT networks—have expanded the
threat landscape.
One of the
ways to start securing the network is by developing skills in monitoring those
transition points. The communications coming in from those IoT devices go into
your IT infrastructure at some point. So it’s being able to authenticate those
devices, assess the data coming in, and secure the data in transit.
There are
many considerations when you are enabling an IoT device to communicate with
your IT systems. The best way to start to defend that is by looking at the security
of the IoT devices themselves and making sure that, again, you’re testing the
vulnerabilities and making sure you’re using the proper security posture on
those IoT devices as is practical.
You can only
do so much at any given time, but you can routinely in many cases assess them
if you have control of them for security vulnerabilities and then patch them,
or be able to remediate them in a different way. So it may not be patching, but
you can control the data inflow from that IoT device differently.
There’s legislation in both the House and Senate—along with the European Union—that would let consumers lower their guard on mobile security by forcing application stores to allow “
sideloading
” of unvetted software. Meanwhile, the Department of Homeland Security is telling us to put our “
Shields Up
” against growing digital threats. As a consumer who is used to having layers of protection, this sounds frightening. Is it?
Absolutely.
When you start to loosen the walled garden and lower the defenses to
accommodate a user base, you are naturally exposing yourself to more threats
because now you control less and when you control less, you’re more vulnerable.
You cannot maintain the same security posture as you had previously if you’re
allowing uncontrolled applications into the environment that can potentially
attack you.