PAGE_TITLE: 
	Rep. McCaul’s Cybersecurity Information Sharing Center: If You Build It, Will They Come? | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Yesterday, the House of Representatives placed four cybersecurity bills – all pieces of a larger cybersecurity legislative puzzle – on the House suspension calendar. The core bill, sponsored by House Homeland Security Committee Chairman Mike McCaul (R-TX), would establish the
National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center
, a coordination point for civil information sharing between sector-specific coordination groups and federal, state, and local government agencies. This multi-layered approach is meant to manage current cyber incidents and eventually reach the goal of proactively managing cyber risks through collaborative efforts. Should the bill pass, will its provisions be enough to bring cybersecurity to the top of the agenda in corporate America?
We have become all too familiar with the vulnerabilities of the information systems of major networks. Recent incidents have shown how cyber criminals degrade, destroy, and disrupt network operations – vulnerabilities we had not yet experienced when the original Homeland Security Act of 2002 was passed more than a decade ago. Today cybersecurity is a daily news item, but we have yet to see corporate America invest in data security at the levels cyber experts have recommended. Protecting information flow, including protecting proprietary information and privacy, means we need to manage information at every level to ensure that unauthorized access does not occur.
Consumers demand real-time access to data on smart phones and laptops. Data sharing is constantly occurring between our electronic devices and between applications (Uber for instance, uses Foursquare’s Application Programming Interface (API) to help enhance its location information). For companies whose employees use their individual applications and mobile devices on the corporate network, planning and implementing incident responses have become hugely complicated. We have blended the use of networks to make our lives more efficient and effective, but this has also created a very real challenge of how to ensure the protection of these networks. Can government agencies and the private sector share real-time, actionable information on cyber threats that would make the networks more resilient and effectively fight real-time attacks? Could this information minimize or deny disruption of the networks?
Establishing governance structures and operating procedures for how to manage risk, provide analysis, and thwart potential threats to network operations is a daunting task for any IT department. Chairman McCaul hopes to give them some cooperative guidance with his National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center. But will it be enough of a carrot to bring corporate network operators to the dialog?
Protecting information flows has become a multi-billion dollar opportunity for many technology firms. Does shared information flow help manage the risk enough to get these players to join the cyber security collaborative effort? And is there enough of a benefit for individual companies who run critical infrastructure operations to be part of this collaborative process with the government as their partner without addressing certain legal concerns?
McCaul’s effort establishes a baseline for the importance of cooperating and coordinating the efforts of owners and operators of critical infrastructure. Cross-sector facilitation is needed to get to the next step in managing cybersecurity. Similar to the creation of the baseline organization of the Center for Disease Control and Prevention almost 60 years ago, cybersecurity information sharing could create benefits that would prevent and minimize incidents that affect multiple networks. Creating the National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center would be the first major step towards creating such a system of prevention, preparation, and planning, and would likely be one that we would all benefit from.
This post was originally published on TechPolicyDaily.