PAGE_TITLE: 
	Keeping Kids Safe Online Requires Shared Responsibility | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

In 2023, policymakers continued to grapple with the challenge of protecting young people online, especially on social media platforms. In response, Meta recently proposed that Congress require app stores to handle age verification for all apps rather than placing this responsibility on individual social media companies or with parents and guardians, where it belongs.
As an expert dedicated to protecting data privacy and a longtime proponent of youth safety, I interpret Meta’s approach as a punt rather than a solution to a legitimate problem. While app stores do have a role to play, the duty to obtain meaningful parental consent lies first and foremost with companies providing services to minors. Relying solely on app stores for age verification is misguided for several reasons.
First, legal precedents established in the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA) make it clear that apps and websites used by children under the age of 13 must take steps to obtain verifiable parental consent. COPPA emphasizes website and app operators’ direct responsibility for building consent flows for parents to approve the collection of their children’s information. Pushing this obligation onto app stores conflicts with COPPA’s intent of making child-directed online services accountable for securing parental permission.
Second, tools like parental controls depend on apps providing accurate age ratings—something social media companies like Meta control for their own products. Both Apple’s App Store and Google’s Play Store have similar age rating guidelines that developers must follow when applying to the App or Play Store.
Via Adobe Images
for their app: 4+, 9+, 12+, 17+, or no rating. If Meta is concerned that their material may be unsuitable for users under 17, they can select that option to ensure their app is not available in the children’s category and
parental controls
are implemented.
The Google Play Store on Android has a similar set of age range guidelines. Google uses an age rating system for apps: 12+, 15+, and 18+.
Parental control
restrictions can be enabled on Android devices to block access to apps based on maturity level. A higher maturity level requires an adult user to positively confirm their age, gating underage consumers from the app if it’s appropriately labeled. The Google Play restrictions also allow for a PIN code for purchase if a maturity level is applied to the app.
Third, Meta has
supported
mandatory “sideloading” of apps—installing apps from outside official app stores. Sideloading circumvents app store security measures and opens devices to unauthorized access, phishing, malware, and spyware. Without security vetting, these apps can exploit device data like contacts and photos. When governments mandate sideloading, app stores lose control over security protections like age verification, exposing users to harm from unvetted apps downloaded outside official stores.
Fourth, not all teens access social media through apps. Social media is also available on desktop computers, bypassing app store guardrails all together.
Rather than shifting responsibility, technology companies like Meta should focus on improving platform transparency and accountability tools for age verification. Providing educational resources would also help empower parents to make informed decisions about their children’s use of technology.
Currently, Meta relies on a voluntary self-disclosure of a user’s age at the account creation stage in conjunction with a machine learning mechanism that analyzes a user’s activity pattern and metadata analytics to flag behavior that signals the posts are most likely an underage user. While these tools can rate and flag behavior that does not align with the self-disclosed age of a user, it’s not enough for the policymakers who are calling on Meta to implement more stringent procedures to confirm a user’s age and restrict the content available to users between the ages of 13 and 17.
It’s tough to require government-issued identification from a minor, especially since many minors don’t have a profile in an external identity database. However, there are systems that verify age with a combination of parental or guardian support documentation for the education system. One of several options Meta could choose is to invest into adult-child pairing tools to enable age verification and parental permission. This would cross-reference an adult’s information and relationship to a child against databases managed by Meta or third-party contractors. They’d access credit reference agencies and other private-sector databases for social profiling and algorithmic matching of adults to minors, allowing the parent or guardian to have access and control to a minor’s permission to engage at the appropriate content level. Regardless of the specifics of any policy, companies must first take responsibility for issues stemming from their platforms instead of promoting policies that kick the can down the road.