PAGE_TITLE: 
	How Congress Could Make Your Smartphone Less Secure: Highlights from My Conversation with Patrick Hedger | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

By Shane Tews
Congress is currently
taking steps to weaken the security of your mobile device by forcing
application (app) store operators to allow “sideloading”—the unvetted
downloading of any app or software from the open internet—which could give bad
actors a fast lane to your personal data and information. Beyond security,
letting online platforms retain control over their digital marketplaces is crucial
as both a physical and information war rages on in Ukraine. Why is Congress
considering this legislation, and why now?
To help make
sense of the sideloading and app security issues,
Patrick
Hedger
, executive director of the
Taxpayers
Protection Alliance
(TPA), joined the latest episode of “Explain to
Shane.” We discussed Congress’ app store regulatory proposals, along with a new
TPA initiative called the
App Security Project
.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of our talk. You can listen to this and other episodes of “Explain to Shane” on
AEI.org
and subscribe via your
preferred listening platform
. You can also read the full transcript of our discussion
here
. If you enjoyed this episode, leave us a review, and tell your friends and colleagues to tune in.
Shane Tews: Patrick, let’s get started with
a quick overview of the Open App Markets Act, which is currently under
consideration in Congress. The bill, if it became law, would demand that tech
companies lower their guard on security by making all software eligible for
downloading, possibly omitting the key step of human vetting for app stores.
What’s going on here?
Patrick
Hedger: You’re exactly right. And while we’re talking about omitting key steps,
this legislation was passed out of the Senate Judiciary Committee without an
official legislative hearing. They’re trying to claim some of these antitrust
hearings counted as legislative hearings, but that’s just not the case. It went
straight to a markup and was voted out of committee without any vetting or
consideration of some serious cybersecurity concerns.
The bill
would effectively turn your smart device into something more akin to an old
laptop, on which you could download almost anything from the open web. Some
people like that, but for the most part, people just need their smartphones to
work regularly and reliably. Increasingly, a smart device is becoming the one
thing people leave their house with. It’s your house keys, car keys, credit
card, and your personal identification in some states. Given this, why are we
shifting the burden of protecting cybersecurity from trillion-dollar tech
companies onto consumers who rely on these devices every day? I think it’s
adding an unnecessary step when folks have already signaled that they like their
devices as-is.
Apple entered a busy market with a more
closed device that gave people a sense of security and was almost foolproof.
You can go into the app store, download an app, and not have to look into the
background of the app developer because you know Apple has vetted them and that
they’ve met a certain bare minimum of standards. Trying to get rid of that now,
I think, is grossly misguided. The White House recently said, “Shields up;
Russia is getting desperate. They’re looking for ways to put pressure on us
through cyberattacks.” They’ve effectively told businesses, “Use everything at
your disposal to increase cybersecurity.” Simultaneously, you have allies of
the president in Congress basically trying to outlaw one of the key
cybersecurity measures that companies can deploy right now.
You
started a new organization to specifically address these issues. Tell us about
that.
At the Taxpayers Protection Alliance, we
started the App Security Project, which felt natural because we’re a taxpayer
and consumer watchdog organization. I don’t think a lot of people understand
the threat to both their devices and expectations around their devices that
this kind of legislation poses.
I think, right now, we have almost a tyranny
of experts. You have very tech-savvy folks who like a more open ecosystem. That’s
great for them; that’s a tradeoff they can make. But the average consumer isn’t
looking to build their own computer in their basement and have the most open
system. They just need something that works for them on a day-to-day basis. I
think there’s a real disconnect there.
What are the specific problems and concerns
with sideloading?
Sideloading
essentially allows devices to run software that hasn’t first gone through a
vetting process such as Apple’s with its e-marketplace. You can’t actually go
into a browser on your iPhone right now, download any software, and run it on
the phone. It has to come through the app store, which has a vetting process in
place.
Sideloading
basically allows developers to go around the app store and circumvent this
vetting process. There are several reasons why they want to do that; the main
one is to essentially bypass Apple’s payment system. That’s putting more money
into the hands of big videogame developers and other similar entities. But
there are systems out there that do allow some sideloading. The Android
ecosystem, which is more open, allows sideloading which, again, is just
downloading software directly from the open web.
But there’s
a tradeoff there. You have access to more applications and potential software
to run on your smart device if you have an Android. But at the same time, the
data show that Androids are somewhere in the double-digits-times more likely to
be infected with malware than an Apple device. And that’s not necessarily a bad
thing because, again, you get more access. If you’re more tech-savvy and you
know what you’re looking for, an Android device might be better for you. But if
you’re just kind of the average consumer or you’re looking for a device to buy
your elderly parent that you know is reliable for them, you may favor a more
closed ecosystem that’s foolproof like Apple’s.
What this
legislation unfortunately does, under the guise of creating more choice through
sideloading, is reduce choice at the hardware and operating system levels by limiting
consumers’ ability to decide between a closed, foolproof system and a more open
ecosystem that allows sideloading.
This gets to the idea of a company “self-preferencing”
its own products, which the lawmakers behind these bills are essentially trying
to outlaw. But this is just in the digital world. What’s going to happen next
time I go to the grocery store and want to buy a generic-brand product?
Exactly. I
think more rules, regulations, and legislation need to be neutral to the market
as a whole.  Everybody likes Costco’s
generic Kirkland brand. If it’s okay for them to self-preference their products
and offer them at a lower price or in a more favorable store location, there’s
no reason why tech companies shouldn’t be able to do the same. I think that’s
just a question of basic fairness.
That also
gets to the question of why members of Congress would be pursuing antitrust legislation
that has all of these really clear cybersecurity holes and threats. Why is
there this rush? I think it’s because they don’t want to stop at the tech
sector. The tech sector presents the first case where you’ve got Republicans
and Democrats really mad at the same sector for a lot of different reasons, so
there’s this political appetite to take a bite out of those companies. But the
long game is interesting. And we’ve already seen this—the Democrats have kind
of played their hand with some new legislation they’ve introduced that would
basically prohibit any merger larger than $5 billion. And it’s retroactive to the
year 2000, I think. That shows you the direction Democrats want to go. (There
are Republican co-sponsors, though, who are giving these bills traction.)
There’s the
other problem too with arbitrary size thresholds, which is that they are kind
of moving targets. But that self-preferencing that goes on elsewhere in the
economy is the next target. Silicon Valley to me just seems like the proving
ground for where folks want to take antitrust law. And they’ve said as much. I
mean, you’ve got Sen. Amy Klobuchar (D-MN) openly saying that it’s “everything
from caskets to cat food.” To me, the fact that those are such obscure examples
shows there isn’t that much concentration in the market. And Sen. Tom Cotton
(R-AR) is a co-sponsor of the aforementioned mergers bill with her.
But I
digress. They’re looking to use antitrust as a hammer to go after every last
sector that’s politically disfavored from Big Pharma to Big Agriculture to any
sort of sector that catches political ire if bills like this—which inherently
weaken our understanding of antitrust—move forward.
There are
all sorts of problems with the legislation I mentioned regarding mergers, not
least of which is: It seems to pretty explicitly carve out Arkansas-based
Walmart and Minnesota-based Target, among other major retailers. But what’s
funny is that this market is so dynamic with these companies coming and going
that Facebook (Meta now) over the course of less than a month went from being
covered by that legislation with a $600 billion market cap threshold to no
longer being covered based on a drop in their market value. And a lot of that
drop actually has to do with privacy-enhancing systems that Apple was free to
put in place but would be outlawed by other antitrust legislation that we see.
Ironically, the same senators probably like those changes Apple made despite
their attempts to effectively outlaw them going forward.
How can we follow along with the work
you’re doing?
Protectingtaxpayers.org
is the website of the Taxpayers Protection Alliance Foundation. The website for our project specific to these issues, the App Security Project, is
appsecurityproject.org
.