PAGE_TITLE: 
	CES, Connected Devices, and the Importance of Network Integrity | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Connected cars, drones, and household products with sensors, cameras, and communication capabilities were the highlight of this year’s Consumer Electronics Show (CES). But one of the most prevalent underlying assumptions at CES was that our existing networks have enough bandwidth available to allow these devices to connect to one another — and that more spectrum will become available in the future as demand grows.
With the Internet of Things (IoT) finally becoming a reality, many companies presenting at CES highlighted the need for speed on multiple levels to allow all of these “smart” edge devices to interact with each other. Such speed will require faster processing, smarter network connections, and trust that these strengths exist from end to end within the network.
Despite (or perhaps because) 2015 ended as the “
year of the hack,
” there were some at CES who emphasized the importance of securing data flows between these connected devices. Network operators with integrated cloud offerings highlighted the importance of security in the cloud to reassure the many consumers who rely on it. Some consumer goods companies also touted security, partnering with network providers who see cybersecurity as a top priority.
2016 will surely bring more data breaches, but securing information flow is now top of mind for companies that rely heavily on the data connected devices create – and the trust of consumers using those devices. Would you agree to be shuttled in an EHang 184 drone or drive in an autonomous car if you thought someone could hack into it and take control? What about high-level performance structures of integrated over-the-top devices, which strive to move your data from your house to your car in a continuous flow? Or even the smart refrigerator and its internal cameras, which allow you to view the contents of your fridge while at the grocery store?
In light of these considerations, government regulators are increasing their awareness of — and role in — this space. The Federal Communications Commission, the Federal Trade Commission, the Federal Aviation Authority, the Department of Transportation, the Department of Health and Human Services, and finally Congress have each sought a part to play in the oversight of connected devices. Device manufacturers and the networks that carry their data must be much more aware of the need to secure both the device and the data as part of the original design architecture.
Ideally there will be a meeting of the minds across platforms to accomplish security objectives and to guarantee protected data flow from the edge through the core. Stakeholders must fight to ensure minimal risk exposure of both individuals and enterprise users as we enjoy the astounding advantages all of these new technologies can provide.