PAGE_TITLE: 
	The ‘Splinternet’ and Online Security: Highlights from My Conversation with Nick Merrill | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

By Shane Tews
The
potential for a fragmented, decentralized global internet (or “splinternet”) is
a concern on many levels. Two aspects of internet governance are at play: the
technical aspects of connectivity (or lack thereof), and content delivery —
i.e., what material is permitted, censored, or filtered. As China, Russia, and other
authoritarian-leaning regimes advance top-down visions of the internet that
reflect their national interests, will the internet fragment further? And what
would moving away from the status quo of a free, open internet mean for global
cybersecurity?
Nick Merrill
, director of the
Daylight Security Research Lab
at the University of California, Berkeley’s
Center for Long-Term Cybersecurity
, joined “Explain to Shane” to discuss how individual countries’ internet governance decisions shape user experiences and the global cybersecurity landscape. Nick’s work includes
The Internet Atlas
— a visual indicator of the global internet’s structural risks — along with the
Internet Fragmentation Index
.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of our talk. You can listen to this and other episodes of “Explain to Shane” on
AEI.org
and subscribe via your
preferred listening platform
. You can also read the full transcript of our discussion
here
. If you enjoyed this episode, leave us a review, and tell your friends and colleagues to tune in.
Shane Tews: Nick, you are currently at the
UC Berkeley Daylight Security Research Lab. Tell us a bit about your work.
Nick
Merrill: In general, a lot of security work starts with trying to make people
more secure, which, of course, needs to be done. Our work is similar but
slightly different. We’re trying to figure out what security means to different
people in the first place. We’re trying to help people figure out what security
risks matter to them and what steps they can take to achieve whatever value of
security they’re seeking.  It’s a more
bottom-up vision of security. And we focus more on tools, practices, and metrics
to help people understand what’s going on.
Another area you focus on is internet
fragmentation.
You’ve helped build
the Internet Fragmentation Index, which is a really interesting tool to measure
how countries treat the internet differently on both fronts: actual
connections, and what is being censored or not permitted. Walk us through that.
Our
philosophy here is that when we talk about the internet, we’re really talking
about the amalgamation of a bunch of technologies that have been layered on top
of one another to produce what appears to be a global internet. The question we
began to ask is: How is this purportedly global network different in different
countries?
We basically
measure proxies of different layers of the internet and different technologies
in this internet stack across countries to track material differences. Here, we’re
not concerned with normative values of freedom. We’re concerned only with
descriptive values, technologies, and how these technologies link networks
together and how they vary. Our goal here is to see who is similar and different.
And we end up with basically clusters of internets that are similar and
interoperable with one another, and where they’re situated and who they’re
similar to. We’ve ended up with this map of similarities between national
internets.
It turns out
that this map and these similarities correlate with trade and military
alliances. For example, if you block similar websites to someone, you are more
likely to also have a trade agreement with them. You are more likely to be in a
military alliance with that country. We find that these patterns reflect and
probably shape other facets of geopolitical relations.
So how do we incorporate security into a
network ecosystem that lacks a central control mechanism?
Content
delivery networks (CDNs) get incoming traffic and determine whether that
traffic is legitimate. They then put content close to the people requesting it,
which is great for the network’s speed and reliability. In my opinion, these CDNs
serve a really important function. They are integral to the internet. And I’m
not anti-CDN in any way, but the problem with CDNs is that there are very few
of them, they’re run by a handful of private companies, and if they were to go
down, we would have really widespread outages. But these companies are relatively
good at security.
I think the
big systemic risk here is a big state-sponsored attack. Russia, for example,
doing a highly sophisticated attack on a CDN could arguably collapse the global
internet through cascading failures that CDN outages sometimes cause. So the
problem in some sense is the centralization of CDNs.
The question
— what do we do about it — is complicated. I would note that one of the
internet’s original designs was to avoid centralization. The idea is that things
go down. Things happen. As long as there’s enough redundancy, you can always
route around a failure. And historically that has been very true. CDNs are kind
of the first things that have challenged that in the sense that they are so
centralized. If there were an outage, it would really be impossible to route
around. It would also cause failures to cascade downstream — even for people
who don’t directly use the provider.
So what do
we do about that? I think there’s a lot of interest in kind of
re-decentralizing this infrastructure. This is one of those things where a
blockchain-like technology — not literally Bitcoin, but a decentralized
consensus mechanism — might actually help provide a kind of decentralized
caching service. There may even be ways to provide a decentralized distributed
denial-of-service protection on the security side. To me, this is a really
interesting area for research. I think whatever we can do to provide fallbacks
or failures would complement any policy intervention.
With regard
to these policy interventions, I don’t know for sure, but I think a company
like Cloudflare should report to the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency at the Department of Homeland Security. This is absolutely critical
infrastructure. This kind of pan-internet meltdown would be super dangerous.
On the content side, is it our place to
tell governments they need to have more open communication with the world and
their own citizens?
This is one
of my favorite things to think about. I think a key piece of background is that
the internet is material. The internet is absolutely made of physical matter.
There are cables that run under the ocean. There things that travel through the
air and physical machines in different places. An idea pioneered by China here
is that the internet goes through our borders; we have sovereignty over it.
It’s within our right to do whatever we want with this content. But this is
antithetical to the ideas of the people who built the internet. I think the
question is: What do we want the world to be like, and who has the power to
make it that way? And when I look at the internet, this is an internet that’s
very much run by the United States that is facing really serious challenges
from all sides: domestic tech companies all the way up to national adversaries.
For now, the
US still has quite a lot of power. So we’re at this critical juncture where I
think that with concerted policy and public-private collaboration, it is
possible to change the direction of the internet really broadly. But how exactly
we do that is really the question. So where my work fits in is that we try to
make these metrics that describe how the internet is working.
I am not
sitting here with all of the answers to these questions. But what I know for
sure is that if we want to do anything, we have to see to what degree our
interventions are having the effect we want them to have. And that’s really
where measurement and metrics play a role.
Disinformation is often cited as a
cyber-adjacent risk. Do you think there is a way to have less disinformation on
the internet?
First of
all, I think disinformation is absolutely a core cybersecurity issue. From the
perspective of our adversaries, our core, traditional cybersecurity defenses
are overall very good, but the government has this kind of hands-off attitude
toward content online. So disinformation is very much the path of least
resistance as far as really striking the US in the digital domain.
The question
is: As countries and private actors like Facebook try different strategies to
combat misinformation, what is the effect on the global internet? Are those
interventions making the global internet more robust? Are they making the
internet more fragile in certain ways? Are they fragmenting the internet or are
they making the internet more global? This is really where we need a guide. We
need metrics that tell us what is happening when these different governance
strategies are being deployed, because people are going to try stuff.
And that is
what it is. No one has a good answer, so it will take some experimentation.