PAGE_TITLE: 
	How Is Cybersecurity Law Being Constructed? Highlights from My Conversation with Jim Dempsey | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

By Shane Tews
The extent
to which lawyers, corporate executives, and government officials focus on
cybersecurity fluctuates with the threat level posed by malicious cyber actors.
In light of recent ransomware attacks on critical industries, lawmakers are
looking at more regulatory obligations to mitigate the risks these threats
pose. Companies, meanwhile, are working to comply with a chaotic patchwork of
rules and regulations. The field of cybersecurity law is not systematic, and
industries are working through who owns the internal cyber regulatory
responsibilities and compliance obligations.
In an effort
to create a coherent roadmap for everyone involved in cybersecurity law,
Jim
Dempsey
published a book titled “
Cybersecurity
law fundamentals
.” Jim joined the latest episode of “Explain to Shane” to
give an overview of the book and to discuss key lessons that lawmakers,
industry leaders, and lawyers would be well-advised to consider when it comes
to cyber.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of our talk. You can listen to this and other episodes of “Explain to Shane” on
AEI.org
and subscribe via your
preferred listening platform
. You can also read the full transcript of our discussion
here
. If you enjoyed this episode, leave us a review, and tell your friends and colleagues to tune in.
Shane Tews: Jim, welcome to the podcast. To
get us started, tell us what your new book covers, and what inspired you to
write it.
Jim Dempsey:
In 2016, the dean for curriculum at University of California, Berkley School of
Law asked me to teach a course on cybersecurity law to a group of mostly
foreign students getting a two-year degree. At the time, there was no case
book, so I started compiling my own materials. After a year or so, I had a
pretty good set of PowerPoints that I thought I could turn into something
publishable.
I was a bit inspired by Paul Schwartz and Dan Solove, who have a publication with the International Association of Privacy Professionals (IAPP) called “
Privacy law fundamentals
.” I thought it would be great to have “Cybersecurity law fundamentals,” and that IAPP would be the ideal publisher because they are practitioner-oriented.
It was a
fascinating exercise for me, looking at how a new field of law is being
constructed. As you and many of your listeners will know, the United States
does not have a comprehensive privacy law. We have a patchwork quilt of
sectoral approaches. The same is true with cybersecurity; there is no single
comprehensive cybersecurity law.
Really, the
field is made up of criminal law, the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act, common-law
torts, negligence contracts, some regulatory law, and Federal Trade Commission
(FTC) enforcement. And now, quite fascinatingly, trade and national security
law are being applied in attempt to keep dangerous products and services out of
our critical infrastructure.
Putting that
all together and trying to make sense of it — then trying to keep it up to date
— was a fascinating challenge. You just wouldn’t believe how much there is when
you dig into it.
Then, Colonial
Pipeline gets hit, and suddenly everybody is wondering what rules govern these
pipelines that are so critical to our economy. It gets shut down by a
ransomware attack and suddenly, the home heating oil, jet fuel, and gasoline
stop flowing. So it’s an amazing, fascinating, and rapidly developing field.
It’s been fun putting this together, and I hope it’s useful to practitioners.
You said there are some ongoing efforts to
keep the book up to date. How are you doing that?
The book is actually available from IAPP as we’re speaking. You can buy a hard or e-book copy; regardless of which you buy, I’m launching a free website called
cybersecuritylawfundamentals.com
that I’ve already populated with about 40 pages worth of updates.
Between when
I sent the book off for proofreading and layout and now, when it’s being
published, there’s been a lot of water under the bridge. So I’ve realized I’ll
have to constantly work to keep this up to date. I now have 16 chapters and 16
sets of updates, and I’ll continue feeding that website as, again, we watch
this fascinating area of law develop in real time. The courts, regulatory agencies,
and the White House are far from finished grappling with this.
You briefly mentioned similarities between
cybersecurity and privacy law. As concepts, how do you overlay those two
things?
That’s such a fascinating question. For anyone who’s been doing privacy for a long time, you’ll remember that the origins of information privacy are founded on this concept of
fair information practices
. How do you use and collect information about individuals? These guidelines cover notice and consent, but also purpose specification, collection limitations, and limits on secondary use and security.
There was
always the principle that if you collect information about an individual, you
have some obligation to protect it against loss or misuse. In a way, that’s the
foundation of the FTC’s cybersecurity authority. The FTC has basically said it
is an unfair trade practice to take somebody’s personal or sensitive data and
not protect it with reasonable measures.
And a lot of
what this book is about — a lot of what the field is about, of course — is what
is reasonable, because the standard in cybersecurity is not perfection.
Everybody agrees — certainly all the technologists agree — that there is no
such thing as perfect security. Particularly now in a world of advanced,
persistent threats, there is no perfect security. The perfectly secure system
would be useless; it would be encased in concrete and buried in the bottom of
the ocean.
So the
standard is reasonableness. Then that opens the question of: What is
reasonable? How much security is enough security? That’s what companies are
grappling with. It’s a cost-benefit test, really, and it should be. That’s what
regulators are grappling with, too — and Congress, to some extent. To me, that is
the fundamental question in this field: How much security is enough security to
protect you from legal liability?
With so many different bodies tackling this
and so many laws being passed, I think it can be really hard to build
compliance into the design of certain devices. Would you agree?
That’s
another way in which privacy and cybersecurity are similar. They both have to
be built in from the design level of a product. We’ve been saying for years
that you can’t bolt on privacy after the product is designed, and you really
can’t bolt on security. And some of the same questions that you ask from a
privacy perspective, you should be asking from a cybersecurity perspective.
The first
thing that any company has to do, large or small, is take an inventory. What
data are we collecting? Where are we keeping it? What devices are connected to
our network? What software is running on our network? That’s important from
both a privacy and cybersecurity perspective.
The chief
privacy officer and the chief information security officer need to have a good
relationship and work together inside a company. Then, through the product
development teams and the product counsel, you push down that recognition into
the company to the development stage. So whether it’s privacy by design or
secure software development practices, both privacy and cybersecurity need to
be taken into account — absolutely, from the beginning.
Speaking of integrating privacy and
security protections into certain services, what are your thoughts on proposals
in Congress to allow “sideloading” in app stores? This would basically force
companies like Apple, which prioritize user security, to allow unvetted
third-party apps to enter their app stores and end up on users’ devices. I
personally think it’s crazy.
Well, it’s
rooted in this concept about the right to tinker with a device you’ve
purchased. The idea is, “I bought it, so I should be able to unlock it and do
whatever I want.” This is a long-running debate in the industry, but you’re
taking a huge risk in doing so. For Apple, who has put tons of effort into
developing a secure environment for users, it’ll be way more challenging to
ensure that everything getting pushed onto user devices is a security upgrade,
not a downgrade.
This is why
Apple has been so strict on the encryption issue. They don’t want to push
anything to anybody that ends up degrading the iPhone’s security capabilities.
I can see the one side of the debate that advocates for the notion of: “I
bought this phone; why should it be wrapped up with various limitations on what
I can do with it?” But I can definitely see the fear from companies that if
they allow unvetted third-party products onto their phones, it’ll break the
phone’s security. As a result, the blame would come back to the device maker
and operating system developer.