PAGE_TITLE: 
	As Government Goes Digital During COVID-19, Cybersecurity Remains a Priority | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

As the digital transformation of the economy and migration
of society online have been forcibly accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic,
cybersecurity must remain a priority for policymakers. As I’ve written
previously, a comprehensive federal cybersecurity strategy could help improve
the cybersecurity of assets beyond the reach of the federal government, to the
benefit of local governments, companies, and citizens.
via Twenty20
The Cyberspace Solarium Commission offers some solid ideas for the federal government in a new white paper titled
Cybersecurity Lessons from the Pandemic
. The commission’s discussion around new strategies for improving the security and resilience of US networks and making government processes related to cybersecurity more seamless are important to moving government processes and data to a more secure digital future.
I do not agree with all of the commission’s recommendations,
but I believe their recommendation to establish a US national cyber director is
imperative. Taking this step would mark a major change in the power dynamics of
cybersecurity and create jurisdictional battles, but they would be worth the fight.
Federal departments and agencies have historically controlled and maintained
their own independent information technology systems. The challenges of
managing these separate assets and the threats they face are compounded by the
variety of congressional committees that all want jurisdiction over the cyber
assets that come with their policy territories. However, given the importance
of digital assets and effective crisis management highlighted by the pandemic, having
a strategic vision with an agreed-upon process for engaging the executive
branch on cybersecurity issues would be a tremendous improvement over the status
quo.
The commission highlights the importance of digitizing critical services and incentivizing the adoption of secure cloud services for state and local governments, small businesses, and federal agencies. Modernizing government processes from legacy platforms has traditionally not been a priority. This has resulted in federal and state aid programs being “stressed to the brink of failure” during the pandemic. It’s time to catch up as the rest of the country goes digital.
The commission also highlights that the government must
anticipate the challenges that accompany a significantly larger workforce
working from home and be able to ensure its resilience in the face of cyber
threats. Corporations have a long history of managing an intense level of cyber
threat activity with both intellectual property and valuable data at stake. As
the government digitizes, laws that combat cybercriminal activities also need
to be modernized to ensure that harmful online criminal activity can be dismantled
swiftly and justice can be achieved for victims. This will require collaboration
that goes beyond traditional law enforcement boundaries both domestically and internationally.




COVID-19 has put a renewed spotlight on the importance of defending
against cyberattacks and data breaches as more users are accessing data from
remote or nontraditional locations. Corporations have long wrestled with risk
assessment as a top priority but it has not been a key factor in how the US
government has historically approached information technology and data. Strengthening
the policies and governance around securing digital assets should be a priority
going forward. The transformation of how the government uses information technology
will be vital for ensuring the federal government can provide services
effectively, that government workers are productive, and that the data citizens
share with the government remain secure.