PAGE_TITLE: 
	Through Coordinated Efforts, We Are Actually Making Progress on Cybersecurity | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

We are frequently reminded that the original internet architecture was not built with security in mind and that the individual companies and users are in charge of securing their networks and information. As we approach October – the month the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has named National Cybersecurity Awareness Month – let’s stop for a second and note the good work that has taken place and what’s on the horizon.
We are making headway on information sharing
Willful misconduct by cyber criminals needs to be addressed with collaborative market intelligence on behalf of all parties, and allowing sharing of intelligence through public-private partnerships is making that happen.
Incentivized by the major cyberattacks in recent years, industry experts are working hard to create best practices that allow cybersecurity information sharing among and across industry sectors. This coordinated information effort allows cyber experts to shrink the attack surface and networks to continue to operate under assault. Private sector stakeholders have also proved highly innovative, replacing weaker components of the internet infrastructure with more secure architecture through the creation of new software applications that add layers of protection where original hardware falls short for today’s digital needs.
Similarly, the DHS’s Critical Infrastructure Partnership Advisory Council (CIPAC) and the many other operational programs that work on government cyber-coordination have improved real-time public-private intelligence gathering. These public-private partnerships, which are coordinated at the international, national, and state level, have shown great progress in providing policy and guidance that allow industry sectors to collaboratively create a healthier information sharing environment.
Multiple government entities have also worked to bring together partners in cybersecurity solutions through workings groups, workshops, and framework discussions. For example, the work that NIST has managed since the National Cybersecurity Commission was established in 2005 has been a great addition to cyber intelligence efforts (and will continue to be just that if the commitment to voluntary partnerships continues).
Plenty more to be done on cybersecurity
Clearly, there is still more to be done. Part of the challenge to public-private partnerships is determining the right time to share information to help industry partners speed recovery and resolution of cyber incidents.
Difficult questions still remain, including: at what time (if ever) does the responsibility of protecting physical or cyber assets migrate to the government? Or is cybersecurity part of a larger corporate governance issue and thus outside the government’s purview?
How to ensure we keep making progress
Creating a trusted environment that encourages innovation among industry partners is key to continued progress. We want governments to encourage policies that bring real-time intelligence gathering and information sharing across industry sectors without punishing those who engage in the collaborative process. The reliability and integrity of the digital economy depends on it.
This post was originally published on TechPolicyDaily.