PAGE_TITLE: 
	How Coding Can Transform Government: Highlights from My Conversation with Amanda Renteria | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

In the
digital age, how can technology make government more effective? The
nonprofit
Code
for America
is training young coders and connecting them with state
and local governments to remove barriers to “safety net” programs like the
supplemental nutrition assistance program (SNAP), health care through Medicaid,
utility programs like the Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP), and
online food purchasing assistance. The organization seeks to digitize these
programs at the local, state, and federal levels in ways that help both the end
user and government track benefits. Code for America also uses the data sets
from these programs to help policymakers create intelligent action programs
that enable more effective outcomes.
Code for America CEO
Amanda Renteria
, a former candidate for elected office and national political director of Hillary Clinton’s 2016 presidential campaign, joined “Explain to Shane” to discuss how Code for America works with federal, state, and local governments to tackle multilayered, society-scale problems through more effective IT solutions.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of our talk. You can listen to “Explain to Shane” on
AEI.org
and subscribe via your
preferred listening platform
. You can also read the full transcript of our discussion
here
. If you enjoyed this episode, leave us a review, and tell your friends and colleagues to tune in.
Shane Tews: Tell us about Code for
America’s founding story and mission.
Amanda
Renteria: At Code for America, our guiding principle is that to really change
peoples’ lives, government does it at scale, but technology is the lever for making
change. When Jen Pahlka, our founder, first started with a group of
technologists, the idea was: How can we inject a new way of doing things in
government, and how can we use technology as that lever? In every single
industry, modernized systems have brought us into the digital age, so how do we
do that with government?
Over the last
decade, Code for America has helped launch the first National Day of Civic
Hacking, has created fellowships in cities across America, has established a
big volunteer network — 25,000 strong, 85 brigades across the country — and has
dived deeper into products and programs that are particularly focused on
low-income communities. We look at ways to not just upgrade a system, but also
make it better, more efficient, less costly, and as good as what you would find
in the private sector.
Your work is really amazing, and I love
that you focus on government assistance programs that are well-known to the
public.
A while
back, we took a step back and said, “What does it really take to create a
resilient country?” And there were three different pillars that we saw. Number
one is the social safety net. This was long before COVID-19 happened, but we
thought about food stamps programs, women and children programs, and social
services. We then considered how end users navigate these systems and tried to
improve that framework.
The second
piece that we work on is automatic record clearance — righting wrongs within
the criminal justice system — which has been a much newer effort in which a lot
more states have come on board and have used technology to do it quicker and
more easily so that when DAs say, “We want to make sure people don’t have this
burden,” we can apply new technology solutions to make sure that doesn’t
happen. Ultimately, we believe a resilient country means that you have active
civic engagement, and that’s what our volunteer base is all about.
You will see
us show up during crises. We have done a lot of mapping for hospitals. During
hurricanes, you will find us working on how to help people find food shelters or
home shelters. As we look forward, we have a unique window of opportunity right
now as people are rethinking government systems, particularly due to COVID. How
do we upgrade and modernize in a way that takes these services and, more
generally, the way government works, to a whole new level? So far, we’re really
excited about what we’ve seen.
When your volunteers show up during a
hurricane, how do they get into the system and help mitigate the most pressing
challenges? What is the real entry point for your tech solutions?
There are a
couple of ways. We have city hackathons that get together and try to make these
systems better. For example, during a hurricane, there are a lot of different
networks in which people are trying to find shelter. Well, one of the problems
we found when hurricanes hit is that the systems themselves were lagged 24 or
48 hours. So we came in and said, “How do we help you build a website?” or “How
do we build our own website?” so that instead of facing uncertainty regarding
whether certain shelters or relief locations are open, we have a real-time interface
that instructs you where to go.
Another
example is: During the pandemic, school lunch programs were closed. It was much
harder to figure out food assistance programs, and so some of our brigades
around the country started to map out where you could go get food assistance. Our
maps would tell you: “Here, you can get cash assistance. Here, a nonprofit has
propped up to help folks who are trying to figure out how to make ends meet.
Here, you can get workforce training, etc.”
I love that you basically are first
responders who code. That’s awesome.
That’s a
great way to put it. It’s a state-by-state effort at the moment, but I hope we
can figure out how to do this at a national level so that there’s some sort of
centralized mechanism. I do think COVID has made people more willing to
question older ways of doing things, which could give us some great
opportunities going forward.
Public-private sector coordination is
another area of emphasis for you all. How have you tackled this issue?
Private-public
sector coordination is interesting because our approach is very
people-centered. But we have noticed that the private and public sectors sometimes
speak different languages. On the bright side, what we often hear is: “Wait a
second, we saw this work in this state with these folks. Maybe you can do it in
the same way here.” Essentially, we’re trying to address different states’
needs while working with both the public and private sectors, so anywhere we
can find common ground or common knowledge of existing solutions is key. Sometimes,
it’s a private-public sector solution. Sometimes, it’s a community-based
organization solution. Sometimes, it’s simply the process design within the
government itself.
And again, when
we can orient solutions around the person that receives the services, then it
all links in nicely. That can be really difficult with private sector companies
who have scaled, let’s say, a software product that doesn’t quite customize for
X state or Y state or X community or Y community that the state might be trying
to reach. So sometimes we can work with private sector companies or vendors
that are already in a given city and go, “Can you tweak it in this way? Can you
tweak it in that way?” But many times, what we have found is that the public
sector might not have those skills within it in order to do it themselves.
That’s where the coordination is key.
You’ve also had some interesting political
experiences. You were the National Political Director for Hillary Clinton’s
2016 presidential campaign, and you even ran for Congress and governor. Tell us
how that informs what you’re doing now.
I spent a decade on the Hill working as a policy wonk really
involved in ensuring we have the kind of policy that empowers all communities. I
then realized throughout that process that it was also important to understand
the politics side of it: campaigns; how we elect officials; and how those
voices are brought to the Senate, Congress, state legislatures, etc. And so I
believe one of the biggest things that we need to do is make sure that we use
tech in a way that allows those conversations to happen. We need to allow
people to connect with policymakers in a way that promotes dignity and respect
and informs and educates folks about what their government should and can look
like. I believe we can do this.
It’s just
the idea that we could flip government programs on their heads to actually
empower people instead of perpetuating burdensome processes that people endure at
their most vulnerable moments in life. So I just think there’s so much here
that we can do, but it really does start with: What do people need and want?
And that’s what your work centers around on a campaign. When you’re sitting in
the halls of the Senate, it’s tough to truly understand what’s going on in real
life. But I think that technology, if we apply it well, can keep elected
officials a lot more informed about what is needed and what is happening on the
ground. To do this, though, we need a system that reaches people in rural,
low-income, hardest-to-reach areas. Once we do that, we will have a government
that’s right for the digital age.
What would you recommend for any listeners
interested in getting involved?
People are
really excited about what we’re up to, so to keep up with our day-to-day
endeavors, we would love for you to follow us @codeforamerica on Twitter.
In terms of how to get involved, we have brigades across the country — please join them. It’s not just about technology; it’s a lot of community leaders. In fact, many of our solutions come from people saying “I was trying to use this system. It doesn’t work. Can we, as a group, try and figure out a solution around that?” And so I welcome folks to be engaged in that because for us, it’s important to have civic engagement that reaches all people. We need folks who are on the ground, not in government per-se, who are in their community saying, “We can make this better.” And so I just want to welcome listeners to not only follow the work that we do, but join our brigades as well. We look forward to having you and creating what I think could be a pretty amazing government as we reach the future in this country.