PAGE_TITLE: 
	As Problems with Data and Misinformation Mount, Securing Networks and Data Is More Crucial Than Ever | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

The collection and destruction of data are increasingly serious global problems, along with the disinformation and misinformation campaigns that have dominated headlines in recent years. Moving forward, one of humanity’s biggest challenges will be maximizing the potential of advanced technologies such as artificial intelligence, machine learning, facial recognition, autonomous vehicles, and the variety of devices on the network that will be part of a highly connected world. Traditional cybersecurity tactics that seek out clues for malicious attacks to block bad actors are becoming less effective, as data sets are becoming larger and are shared across multiple networks with third parties (who may or may not be authorized to view the data). A key question, then, is how far should we go — and how much should we spend — to protect ourselves and ensure the integrity of the networked world we live in?
via Twenty20
Sen. Mark Warner (D-VA) is looking to start an open dialogue about the need to protect US citizens from offensive cyber-weapons and deter adversaries from attacking our digital infrastructure. In a December 7
speech
, he argued that “failing to articulate a clear set of expectations about when and where we will respond to cyber attacks in not just bad policy, it’s downright dangerous.” He noted that the NotPetya malware attack in 2017 cost more than
$10 billion
in economic damage. The attack affected hospitals, factories, transportation companies, commercial producers, and manufacturing plants. It was one of the most devastating events for infrastructure in recent memory, but its effects weren’t physically visible — there wasn’t a bridge or tunnel destroyed.
Sen. Warner warned that Americans “have a long way to go on cyber hygiene and online media consumption habits,” emphasizing the challenges of constant cyber-attacks and disinformation campaigns driven by social media. He warned of the constant hemorrhaging of personal, corporate, and government data currently occurring and the danger of misinformation driven by social media that is “leaving us exposed as individuals, and vulnerable as a country.”
A
Wired
story this week highlighted a Senate Intelligence Committee report that discussed how easily the Russian Internet Research Agency trolled Americans with memes, false news stories, and fake political action groups:
“Over the past five years, disinformation has evolved from a nuisance into high-stakes information war.” And yet, rather than fighting back effectively, Americans are battling each other over what to do about it. “We have conversations about whether or not bots have the right to free speech, we respect the privacy of fake people, and we hold congressional hearings to debate whether YouTube personalities have been unfairly downranked,” the report reads. “It is precisely our commitment to democratic principles that puts us at an asymmetric disadvantage against an adversary who enthusiastically engages in censorship, manipulation, and suppression internally.”
As the battle against hackers, misinformation, and bad actors continues, technologies such as machine learning and artificial intelligence are becoming increasingly important tools, but a human (and public policy) element exists as well. As Congress considers new laws around data collection and retention, we need to figure out how to protect information without eliminating the ability to conduct research, adapt, and manage the cyber challenges of using technology.
Who has access to the data?
The presence of unauthorized users on a system has been a long-standing concern for data breaches and network hacks, but recent social media hacks have demonstrated the weakness of terms of service (or user agreements) that obfuscate the amount of third-party data sharing that occurs and where information flows in these arrangements. Whereas in the years before aggregated data sharing advertisers lacked precise insights, today the data available for sale on individual consumers has become a gold mine as profiles are built and shared between companies, data brokers, and even governments. Social engineering efforts can net a large amount of data from a data broker for a remarkably low cost. The resulting insights into users’ lives and the ability to manipulate their opinions on politics, social issues, and more pushes well beyond social networks’ initial function of creating more efficient buying power for ad networks — information is now being weaponized at a social and political level across the globe. As Sen. Warner
noted
in his speech, “The true cost of our cyber vulnerabilities won’t be sudden or catastrophic . . . they will be gradual and accumulating.”
His call to action recognizes the collaborative effort necessary to protect US data and networks and to ensure their viability moving forward. While the government should be evaluating how and where it invests in cybersecurity, it should also consider how the current decentralized structure of each federal agency managing its own security is outdated. Information sharing programs in a siloed environment are counterproductive to protecting our national infrastructure.
Policymakers need to recognize that networks and the data that flow across them are part of our critical infrastructure as they work on national and global cybersecurity policies. While the intelligence community understands the significance of the stolen data from a nation-state, things like the lack of a truly collaborative international information sharing effort on cybercrime continue to cost the global economy as we sort through who to trust and who to block online. As a recent House Energy and Commerce
report
on cybersecurity put it, “The integration of effective cybersecurity has not kept pace” as data and networks have become key economic drivers.
The US is just coming to grips with the economic cost of losing trust in the information economy. Everyone that uses and relies on data and technology needs to acknowledge the importance of cybersecurity and be proactive in protecting these valuable assets. It’s not just investing in cybersecurity that’s important, but also encouraging and rewarding companies and individuals for investing in and protecting the networked economy. We need to find a balance among our concerns with security, privacy, connectivity, and innovation, understanding that there are implications for all parties, be they national security agencies, corporations, tech platforms, or private citizens. Being informed and engaged is an important first step, and taking actions to protect our integrated lives is key to our future.