PAGE_TITLE: 
	Internet Censorship in the Wake of the NTIA Announcement | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

The U.S. National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA) announced on Friday that it plans to end its formal relationship with the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) by not renewing the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) contract in 2015. The NTIA’s decision to discontinue the IANA contract was expected, so the news did not come as a surprise. This past fall, the situation surrounding the National Security Agency’s (NSA) surveillance tactics jump started a dialog about the IANA’s function. This debate over if and when the U.S. Government should transition out of its last role in managing the root zone has ebbed and flowed in the ICANN arena for years. However, to this point, the department’s rarely noticed management of the root zone has made the task seem simple.  Now, as this technical function of the Internet enters a highly politicized environment, new challenges arise.
Chief among those challenges are the lack of a public plan regarding whom to transfer the root zone management function to in the absence of the NTIA and how to protect this function from political desires to limit freedom of speech.  Foreign countries have shown us through their actions that laissez-fair governance of the Internet is not their goal. Even here in the U.S., the Chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee, Senator Jay Rockefeller, issued a statement this past week praising NTIA for its move on the IANA function a day after he sent a letter to the Obama Administration suggesting “.sucks” should not be added to the root zone as a new Top Level Domain.  If the first amendment protects “.sucks,” it should also protect .wtf, .god, .dog, or .shabaka.  Similar letters have arrived at the Department of Commerce from multiple foreign governments for years, but no one worried that the suggestion of censoring the Internet via the root zone was truly a possibility.
Now, censorship is a live question thanks to the NTIA’s announcement.  The next step is an open comment period at ICANN as it crowd sources the answer.  Those of us who care about the future of the Internet have it in our best interest to make sure ICANN keeps the free and open Internet as its top priority.