PAGE_TITLE: 
	Extending US Leadership on 5G: A Conversation with FCC Commissioner Brendan Carr | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Event Summary
On Monday, March 15, Brendan Carr of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) joined AEI’s Shane Tews to share his vision for extending US leadership in 5G.
Commissioner Carr noted that just a few years ago, experts and analysts were saying the US was in danger of ceding leadership on 5G to overseas competitors. However, over the past four years, the FCC freed up large amounts of crucial spectrum for commercial use and modernized its approach to infrastructure by updating rules and cutting red tape — and the US is now positioned to lead the world in 5G. Commissioner Carr outlined a multiyear road map to build on these successes and extend US leadership moving forward.
Commissioner Carr outlined a calendar for spectrum auctions in coming years and stressed the importance of keeping pace on infrastructure reforms. He emphasized that misguided regulations — such as a return to Title II net neutrality — would turn back the clock on four years of progress and positive outcomes for network speeds, investment, and competition.
Commissioner Carr and Ms. Tews discussed the importance of broadband mapping for closing the digital divide, 6 gigahertz spectrum for Internet of Things applications, the importance of increasing the number of tower technicians and telecom crews for 5G build-out, and satellite broadband.
— William Rau
Event Description
In recent years, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has taken numerous steps to ensure that the US is ready for next-generation networks — with more efficient and secure supply chains, software upgrades, and higher speeds — including 5G wireless technology. It has conducted crucial wireless spectrum auctions, significantly expanding commercially available mobile airwaves and spurring billions of dollars of investment in US mobile networks. The FCC has also reduced regulatory barriers to 5G deployment and worked with state and local governments to speed 5G deployment. 5G is poised to power the innovations and economy of the future. How can the US ensure that it continues to lead the world in 5G in the coming years?
FCC Commissioner Brendan Carr joins AEI’s Shane Tews to discuss the results of the FCC’s actions over the past four years and present his vision for extending US leadership in 5G moving forward.
VIDEO