PAGE_TITLE: 
	AEI Section 230 Spring Summit, Part I: Highlights from an Expert Panel Discussion Locating the State of the Section 230 Debate | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

On April 19, 2023, AEI hosted a half-day summit to identify where the policy zeitgeist is at on online content moderation policy given the consideration of two recent Supreme Court cases with major implications on how the internet as we know it functions. This blog series will highlight the best moments from each discussion. The first panel of the day evaluated what is at stake with these cases and traced where the debate has been up to that point.
This panel of experts featured
Samir Jain
, vice president of policy at the Center for Democracy & Technology;
Clay Calvert
, the Brechner Eminent Scholar Emeritus at the University of Florida;
Kate Ruane
, Sy Syms director at PEN America; and moderated by
Ari Cohn
of Tech Freedom.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of key highlights from that panel. You can watch the full event on
AEI.org
and read the full transcript
here
.
Ari Cohn: I want to lead off with the easiest question, which if answered properly, will let us all go home right now. Did this case need to be a Section 230 case?
Samir Jain: I think there are good arguments that even if you leave aside Section 230, that, at least on the facts of these cases in which there’s no allegation, for example, that the attacks at issue were planned or even discussed on the platforms, or even that those who were involved in the attacks ever used the platforms. I think there are good arguments that there’s very little to show any kind of causation and other elements of the cause of action. One way the Supreme Court could decide these cases is to say, at least on the facts of these cases, there’s no potential for liability directly under the Anti-Terrorism Act, and therefore we don’t even need to reach the question of whether Section 230 would bar liability.
Kate Ruane: That being said, I will say, to answer your question directly, yes, it did need to be a Section 230 case. Samir is absolutely right, that the underlying cause of action could decide this case properly in favor of Google, assuming that Google did not know, is probably what the court will come to, something along those lines. But this really needed to be a Section 230 case. Because the whole point of Section 230 is you’re not supposed to get to the merits. You’re supposed to decide when a cause of action attempts to treat an interactive computer service provider as a publisher. Section 230, generally speaking, bars liability unless the interactive computer service provider has done something to contribute to what made the content or the activity involved illegal.
Clay Calvert: I think that’s why it’s so important, because you cut off the case right there with Section 230. Therefore, you avoid all the litigation costs and the expenses that go with that. So it’s really two steps: Is it a Section 230? If that blocks it, then we end it there and don’t even get to the substantive merits of the underlying cause of action. Litigation costs are so prohibitive—that’s why Section 230 is so key here.
Ari Cohn: So if it needs to be a Section 230 case, then we all have to stay. Broadly speaking, what’s at stake here with the Supreme Court’s decision?
Samir Jain: To me the key policy at issue is users’ ability to speak and users’ free expression rights online. Because as Clay alluded to, the reason that the litigation costs matter a lot is, is that, if platforms realistically face the prospect of those substantial litigation costs, leaving even aside liability, then their rational incentives are, every time there’s a complaint or allegation that a particular piece of content is unlawful, their rational response in many cases is going to be to take that content down. And that’s going to be particularly true of controversial content, content for marginalized communities. You’re going to create a heckler’s veto on the internet. And it’s really the litigation costs that Section 230 insulates the providers from that remove a lot of that incentive. And so if the court were to narrow substantially Section 230 immunity in a way that gave rise to a real risk of liability for third-party content, then I fear that the result is that you have less ability for users to speak online and to express themselves. And to me, that’s really what’s at stake in this case.
Kate Ruane: I couldn’t agree with Samir more. The only thing that I would say to add to that is, that is that difference between Section 230 and the First Amendment in this particular context. Section 230 creates the structure that allows free freedom of expression for users on the internet. And without it, we are left with the First Amendment. But having to continuously fight lawsuits over, and over, and over again, will chill speech on the internet. So I do think that that’s a big part of what’s at stake here. And the attempt to parse the difference in Gonzalez anyway, between being liable for recommending content versus being liable for just allowing it on your service, is a distinction, I think, without a difference in a lot of circumstances. And I’m really hoping if the court does reach the merits and does decide this case, that they make it clear that there could be circumstances in which the automated recommendation of content might have some liability for the platforms. But when that liability is actually founded on the content itself, Section 230 should step in and provide a bar.
Clay Calvert:
Just to reiterate the point about self-censorship and the chilling effect, that’s really what we’re dealing with there. And to Samir’s point is, it’s all minority communities and other groups. So to the extent this has been framed as a big tech kind of case, I think that’s off base. Going through all of the amicus briefs, it affects far more than just big tech. And I think that was obviously the headline grabber. And people say, oh, big tech, anytime you see big, it’s always bad, Big Pharma, big, whatever. But I think, you know, we got to focus more that this protects everybody out there, right, no matter large or small platforms.
Ari Cohn: What do you make of the Court’s discussion of the publisher’s role in the statute?
Samir Jain: I think this gets to the heart of the central question that was raised. Which was this alleged distinction between recommending content on the one hand, versus displaying content on the other. But at least one iteration of the petitioners’ argument was essentially that publication was about the display of content. However, when providers recommend content, they are no longer in the publication bucket. Instead are contributing their own opinion, and therefore don’t fall within the scope of Section 230. But I think that was a distinction without a difference.
If you think of YouTube, there are millions of videos. And so almost by definition, the provider has to choose and select certain videos to display. Or if you think of a search engine, inherently, the first page of search results is essentially the recommendation by the search engine as to what are the most likely responsive sites to the query that the user entered. And so, recommendation is sort of inherent in the choices of what to display and how to rank them. And so that distinction that petitioners are trying to draw between publication activity on the one hand and recommendation on the other is a false distinction in my mind.
Ari Cohn: I have a question from our online viewers. Would you provide thoughts on the politicization of criticism of Section 230 regarding the role of big tech?
Kate Ruane: One of the things that’s missing from the debate in Congress—and definitely at the state level as well—is the idea that the internet is not only Facebook, Twitter, Google, YouTube, and Amazon. It is just not. There are so many other services that exist and that need this protection far, far more. And when we zero in on those companies and the problems that we see with them, we are missing the forest for the biggest five trees. And that has been, I think, a real challenge. One of the places where we’ve actually seen some attention given to sort of the rest of the internet is in the EU. Policymakers should have an eye on how that law is about to be implemented. There will be flaws, absolutely. But there could be guidance for us as we are continuing to look at this from a policy perspective.
Samir Jain:
In that sense, Section 230 is actually a pro-competition statute. Because as Google’s counsel said at the end of the Supreme Court argument, she basically said, “Look, if you reform it into a narrow Section 230, we as Google will survive. We’ll find a way. It’s the smaller providers who basically won’t be able to handle that flood of lawsuits or to have the resources to deal with that potential liability.” And so you will end up concentrating the market even more if you impose liability.