PAGE_TITLE: 
	How 5G Wireless Will Bring Innovation to Main Street America | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

As I’ve written
previously
, to realize the transformative potential of fifth generation or 5G wireless networks, local governments will need to play a key role in the build-out process. This is crucial because while the current average download speed in a US home is 6.5 megabytes per second, 5G is expected to deliver up to 500 megabytes per second. That speed will dramatically enhance transfer and download capabilities and power technologies such as smart infrastructure, driverless cars, and more.
via REUTERS.
5G is about moving data faster with lower latency. 5G network equipment can be attached to existing mobile radio access network infrastructure without needing to completely upgrade existing wireless networks. 5G can be supported by existing 4G infrastructure and will coexist with 4G and LTE technology, and even 3G if it’s still deployed. But the mobile network architecture will need to evolve to handle the vast amount of data 5G applications will be capable of producing and transporting across the network.
As my AEI colleague
Roslyn Layton described
earlier this week, 5G networks “are predicated on multiple small cells the size of shoeboxes attached to street poles, rather than giant mobile towers.” An estimated $275 billion in infrastructure investment by mobile providers will bring 5G to municipalities across the US, but local governments’ approval of equipment placement on utility poles and streetlights will in part control how quickly the new technology comes to their communities.
Many local governments understand the need to change rules governing broadband deployment due to old regulations that prohibit or stall the ability to keep up with newer technology. Regulations that guide large mobile tower deployment do not make sense for small-cell aggregation, and local officials recognize the need to modernize rules and make local application fee structures reasonable and appropriate. These changes do not mean local governments will subsidize the build-out of infrastructure. Rather, they ensure the costs associated with reviewing small-cell deployment plans are proportionate to the costs local governments incur for their time spent reviewing permit requests. Slowing down 5G deployment with excessive local regulatory fees would come at the cost of local citizens’ internet quality and the benefits they could reap from it.
Given these realities, Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Commissioner Brendan Carr recently
announced
an initiative to ensure the US is “5G Ready,” with the aim of reducing excessive local fees for processing cellular permits for access to public rights-of-way and encouraging a “shot clock” approach to shorten the time to deployment of 5G wireless technology.
Questions from local governments are understandable when managing a public asset, so a time frame for decision-making helps all parties. Commissioner Carr has recommended a tool used by the FCC known as a “shot clock.” This approach helps shorten the question and response period by creating a timeline for the review of small-cell permit requests.
A third recommendation by Carr is for local governments to review and remove antiquated policies that do not support today’s digital technology advancements. This will help make small-cell deployment less expensive and make it easier for local communities to gain access to the latest technology.
5G wireless technology promises to bring innovation right to the heart of Main Street. This technology can attract investments that could improve local economies and potentially make local governments more efficient at delivering their own services. This is why cities such as Charlotte, Indianapolis, Oklahoma City, Raleigh, and Waco are investing in the foundation of 5G network hubs to be available to both large and small businesses. By building out their 5G tech hubs, these cities will fuel innovation that could change their economies by giving small businesses the ability to use the same underlying network infrastructure used by many larger institutions without the expense of a major network investment.
To bring the faster, more responsive, and more pervasive network capabilities of 5G wireless to their citizens, governments at the local, state, and federal level must work together to make the innovative potential of 5G infrastructure enhancements a reality.
On September 17, AEI will host FCC Commissioner Brendan Carr and an expert panel to discuss the future of 5G wireless and the FCC’s efforts to clear regulatory hurdles to ensure US leadership in 5G deployment.
RSVP for the event here
.