PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Making of Global Telecommunications Policy: Highlights from My Conversation with Grace Koh and Patricia Paoletta | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

What rules govern how telecommunications standards work across countries? How do governments manage the process to ensure national standards are compatible? And how has the rise of China affected global telecommunications policy? Grace Koh, the US Ambassador to the International Telecommunications Union’s World Telecommunications Conference, and Patricia Paoletta, a telecommunications lawyer and spectrum policy expert, joined me for a two-part discussion on “Explain to Shane” to cover these issues and more.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of our talk. You can listen to the podcast at these links (
Part 1
,
Part 2
) and read our full discussion at these links (
Part 1
,
Part 2
). You can also subscribe to the “Explain to Shane” podcast on
iT
u
nes
or
Stitcher
, or download the podcast on
Ricochet
.
Shane
Tews: I thought for our listeners who may not be as familiar with some of these
things, it’ll be easier if we dial into the acronyms here in a second. Can we
just start with some of the basics? So let’s start with the ITU and it’s three
parts: ITU-T, ITU-D, and ITU-R. Tricia, why don’t you lead off, and give us a
quick breakdown on what these three sectors are and why they matter.
Patricia Paoletta: the
three sectors of the International Telecommunication Union are: R for radio
communications, T for telecommunication standardization, and D for development
sector. These are three different sectors where folks around the world, in an
intergovernmental body but one in which the private sector is very much
engaged, come to discuss those different areas. So R for spectrum allocation
and rules attendant to the use of radio. D for development and how to help
countries deploy broadband and other telecom services in their country. T to
standardization discussions. These three sectors are part of the 150-year plus
body.
The International
Telecommunication Union, which actually was formed before the advent of the
United Nations, was formed out of the conundrum between Germany and France, how
do we regulate telegraph wire?” We want to have telegraph messages going
cross-border, we need to have an international body talk about this. So it was
founded 150-something years ago. Then when United Nations came along, the ITU
was subsumed within it. So right now it is part of the United Nations, but
because it predates it, and it’s fairly technical, it’s a bit more specialized
than some of your more political- or policy-only UN bodies.
Good
to know. Madam Ambassador, or as we will get familial and call you Grace from
here on out, what were you the ambassador of? What is this WRC of which we
speak?
Grace Koh: This is
squarely in Tricia’s world, the World Radio Communication Conference, which
happens every four years. It’s a conference where the 193 national members get
together and update the treaty. Yes, there is a treaty that governs how we
avoid interfering with each other’s technology, because as we all know,
spectrum doesn’t respect borders, and how we assign certain frequencies for
certain services in order to continue to sort of harmonize that Spectrum use.
The countries are all required to abide by it, as part of the treaty
instrument.
It’s a fascinating
process. Every four years, they meet and they set the agenda for the next
conference four years later. And then during those four years in between each
conference, the ITU hosts study groups, essentially people who get together and
study whether or not the proposed changes are actually feasible, recommendable,
desirable. So in this instance, giving an example here at WRC 19, for four
years between WRC 15 and WRC 19 we studied the feasibility of putting 5G in
millimeter wave spectrum. That took up a lot of time in that four-year study
cycle. But obviously that’s not the only thing that’s on the agenda. There are
other things, like how to enable megaconstellation NGSO, Wi-Fi safety and
maritime radar, et cetera. That’s how that works, and each country or region
comes in with their proposals.
So
what’s at stake in these? You’re saying they like to delve into potentially
internet governance, what else are they doing?
Patricia Paoletta: While
Grace considers her answer to that, I do want to jump in. This is where the
nationality of the secretary general of the ITU, the Chinese secretary general,
does come into play, because he was formerly the director of the
telecommunications standards sector, which is the body that is hosting the
WTSA. This is where you do have some interplay, at least through some US
observers’ perspective, between his nationality in playing for the home team
and Huawei. For instance, when Huawei doesn’t win at the industry-driven
standards bodies like 3GPP, they often come back for a second bite at the apple
at the ITU and try to have the ITU bless something that Huawei might be
throwing into the 3GPP or other mix that Nokia or Ericsson or others bat down.
And as Grace suggested,
the ITU-T folks generally have been guilty of mission creep. So ICT [Information
Communications Technology] is broad, but now they’ve been getting into
artificial intelligence, and quantum computing, and a range of issues. They’ve
just created more study groups. So, in the R world, you have just five study
groups, and then you have a number of working parties under each. In the T
world, you have 12 different study groups each with multiple working parties
and focus groups. What all that means is there so many meetings around the
clock, nonstop, that everybody else who’s not interested in having the ITU
regulate telecom has to play whack-a-mole.
To an extent, it’s hard
for the United States, with our budget and our deep technical sector and our
deep public-private history of working together, to stay on top of everything.
You can imagine what it’s like for the rest of the countries, particularly
those in the developing world, trying to manage 12 different study groups and
working parties and whatever. So at least for the US perspective, and actually
our region as well, I think one of our main goals is to try to streamline the
existing structure of the T sector from at least from the 12 different study
groups down to eight study groups, just so it’s more manageable as well as to
prevent this mission creep. And part of the mission creep is pretty scary
stuff, but I will leave it at that.
Well,
why is the international scene so important to tech policy at large? You’ve got
trade, you’ve got competition?
Patricia Paoletta: You
need economies of scale in this global interconnected world that we live in.
It’s no longer sufficient to build a telecommunications switch for one market.
It’s a very competitive market. You’ve got major players up and down the supply
chain throughout the world. The way to compete is to have global addressable
markets. As Grace earlier said, spectrum doesn’t stop at the border. Data flows
hopefully don’t stop at the border. If they do, it’s far more expensive. You do
need those global economies of scale. You get those by talking to our
international partners and international bodies.
Grace Koh: I just want to
point out: I think technology and tech policy, and to some degree tech trade, are
becoming more and more weaponized, in a way, for economic and military
aggression. That’s becoming more of a concern as we’re looking at things like
cybersecurity and supply chains. The international scene also needs to be
managed in a way that allows us to get the benefit of international trade and
those global markets, but at the same time, protect any national security
interests that we have as well.
Let’s get into the global
nature, which gets a little outside of the United States directly, which is
these challenges we’re having with Huawei and ZTE. We all probably spend a lot
of time explaining to people the reason why this matters is because it’s not
just China, it’s Africa, and now it’s, in the last couple of years, really been
Europe adopting a technology that, I’ll be the one to say, is a little suspect.
What are the alternatives? Does
this play itself out on the international diplomacy stage? Is this a huge
issue? I mean, is it always the gorilla in the room, elephant, whichever one we
want to go with? Or is this more of a market situation where you guys don’t
talk about this from a diplomatic point of view, but we know it’s always
omnipresent when you’re actually going to buy your equipment?
Grace Koh: We have spent quite a bit of diplomatic
coin talking about Huawei and the concerns that the United States government
has with Huawei equipment. It’s a concerted effort at the State Department.
There is a whole toolkit for discussing this issue.
First of all, is it a market concern? Yes and no. We
would like to have a market where there are competing players, and one of the
things that I think we have complained fairly frequently of is the fact that
Huawei, with access to state subsidies or state-backed guarantees, doesn’t
compete on the same playing field.
So for example, if it’s able to go to Sierra Leone
and offer to build the whole telecommunications network at a cut rate price with
Huawei equipment, you’re not going to see, I think, another manufacturer able
to do the same sort of thing. They might be able to throw in a soccer stadium
or something along those lines. Then also pitch into the rest of the One Belt
One Road initiative that China has going on. So, that’s a concern. There’s some
unfair market practices there to begin. Then you have the actual practice of
actual deployment that is problematic.
Then you have the substantive concerns about the
security of the networks that are being deployed, which I think we’ve all tried
to alert other countries to, as well. Part of that message has been muddied by
the notion that this is part of a trade war. I think the national security
concerns get lost in the argument that really we’re just putting Huawei under
the ringer so that we can get better advantages in any sort of trade
negotiations. But when that question comes up, I’m quick to remind people that
we have had concerns about Huawei equipment since 2012, when we first required
SoftBank to take all of that equipment out of the Sprint network in order for
it to purchase the Sprint network.
These are not new concerns. They continue to exist,
and I think that the government has information that validates those concerns.
They were one of the major
contributors at the Consumer Electronics Show [CES]. There were companies that
were trying to decide, was there any value still in this space? And all of a
sudden, Huawei just came in and filled in the blank space that some of the
other companies were deciding what to do. Then because Huawei came in, I think,
it’s my personal opinion, you saw some of the others come back, and they were
like, “Well, wait a minute. We’re not going to cede space to these guys.”
It’s very interesting to see that go on.
Patricia Paoletta: But, in addition to the market
concerns and the unfair practices, and those are of course, very prevalent — to
your point, Shane, yes, there’s not a US-headquartered competitor, but there
are trusted ally vendors like Nokia and Erickson who’ve been in the US market,
and have invested heavily, have a lot of R&D, a lot of employees. We want
to see them, of course, not driven out of the market from unfair practices. 

There’s
also some of the, in my view, more sinister technology agendas that Huawei’s
bringing in to various forms, certainly the ITU-T. they have one AI proposal, I
suppose, on facial recognition, trying to get that blessed and sanctioned
internationally. In light of what’s going on in Hong Kong and everywhere else,
that’s scary. Obviously non-democratic powers have very different views towards
the uses of technology and we do have to combat that, combat their proposals at
the ITU. So, certainly, there’s a security aspect as Grace said. There’s the
unfair trade practices. There’s obviously surveillance, but there’s also them
going to the ITU to get their non-democratic use of technology sanctioned.
That’s frightening, and the US government is, and US industry is, rightfully
organized to try to thwart that.