PAGE_TITLE: 
	Lessons from the White House Big Data Report: Learn to Protect Yourself | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

This past Thursday,
the Administration released a report on big data
that highlighted both the positive opportunities of big data collection and how it dangerously compromises privacy, but failed to address the challenge of consumers willfully forfeiting their personal information. The report emphasized big data’s potential to enhance lives through large scale information gathering. In particular, it noted the ability to create more efficient economic outcomes by identifying ways that industry and individuals can better use their time and materials. But the report also acknowledged that the mass collection of personal information creates significant privacy and security concerns. Basically, big data can be good, we just need to reconsider how and why we use it and find ways to maximize the outcome while managing the risks.
Government big data has great potential to encourage analytics and problem solving capabilities if the data is made available for public use. Effective analytic tools that have access to the treasure trove of government collected data could show where trouble spots persist and opportunities are available. Once we have a transparent view into public data being collected daily at the municipal, state, and federal level, those tools can also enable us to see crucial business and public interest trends as they develop. Health, crime, and traffic patterns have proven to be useful in those regions that have analytics available to its citizens. Data driven cities could be more efficient for both the citizens and the government structure. John D. Podesta, Senior Advisor to the President and leader of the report team, acknowledged this when he commented on an app called “street bump”that allows citizens to note potholes and send the data to the public works department via their smart phone.
At the same time, big data presents a serious challenge for society. What should we do with all this data, and how do we protect individuals who share much of their personal life through social networks, apps, geolocation on mobile devices, and online health records? Each of these systems offers collaborative opportunities to make an individual’s life more efficient but also introduces a worrisome level of vulnerability to that individual’s private information. Both non-profit organizations and corporations have programs to inform individuals of the need to protect their personal information, yet we continue to face concerns about individuals failing to do so.
The White House Big Data report failed to pursue one crucial question: if all this personal information is so valuable, why do people give it away so readily and freely?  For example, the report highlights the need for privacy enhancements, especially notice and consent pages, but most consumers click through the notice to get to the next page without giving much thought to what they are agreeing to. This quick click allows the website host or merchant to collect data on the individuals purchase habits, demographics, and usage patterns, but there is no mention of consumer haste in the report.
The information collected by each web host represents a micro data set within “big data,”and consumers have yet to understand how valuable this information is to merchants. Our information is of significant financial value to the e-commerce market. That is why so many people take the time to create programs to acquire, manage and store our information. It’s also why that information is a target for theft, intelligence gathering programs, and online marketers. Sharing so much personal information makes the Internet “free”for most services by supporting advertising software and marketing tools. Of course, there actually is a cost: the wealth of information you willing give up to the big data gods.
There is not a great path towards harnessing the economic power that consumers abandon when they share so much information. However, some people might be more protective of their privacy if they realized the economic benefits of being more judicious with their information. An individual’s personal information is one of his or her most valuable assets. Before blindly signing away their information to the multi-billion dollar industry of consumer data analytics, consumers ought to consider the full cost of their actions.
When Edward Snowden’s NSA revelations came to light, people were outraged that the government collected the very same information that consumers hand over to Google so readily. In light of that controversy, the Administration’s big data report hits on something that we all should acknowledge: our information is incredibly valuable. We ought to recognize that sharing it has a cost and learn to protect it ourselves as strongly as we want the government to protect it for us.
This post was originally published on TechPolicyDaily.