PAGE_TITLE: 
	Using Blockchain to Beat COVID-19: Highlights from My Conversation with Shane Bigelow | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

How can we slow the spread of the coronavirus while maintaining our privacy? Will a test-and-trace app have to track our every move? Shane Bigelow, CEO of Ownum and Vital Chain, joined me on the latest episode of “Explain to Shane” to discuss how blockchain can help in the battle against COVID-19.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of our talk. You can listen to the podcast
here
and read our full discussion
here
. You can also subscribe to the Explain to Shane podcast on
iTunes
or
Stitcher
, or download the podcast on
Ricochet
.
Shane
Tews: Can you walk us through the work? I know you guys put this together
pretty quickly, but you have a very interesting consortium you’re working with
that is specifically Ohio-based, but it probably goes beyond that, so you want
to give us the basics?
Shane
Bigelow: Vital Chain is a company that we started underneath our holding
company, Ownum. Ownum creates different companies that digitize different vital
records. And Vital Chain started, as an idea in our head a couple of years ago,
but the basic concept was to digitize birth and death certificates. And when
you contemplate a birth or death certificate, all it is is a record that a
medical professional signed off on that talks about a particular event
occurring, the event being a birth or a death.
Well you can
transfer that same base technology that we’ve spent a few years developing and
use it to track any medical event, including receiving an inoculation,
vaccination, or antibody test. And that to us is a way that we can provide a
service back to the country to allow for people to have a validation tool — or
a certification tool is probably a better word — a certification tool for the
tests that you’ve received. So on the presumption that mass testing is rolling
out, which I think we all have to presume will occur in some way — and not a
problem that we necessarily need to solve for — on the presumption that mass
testing is rolling out, there needs to be a way to certify the results and that
would make it usable inside of the enterprise world. Because without it, I
don’t know what people would do. Would they just walk with their test results
in a manila folder or something like that?
They need a
way to just have these results certified and to have the results that if you
think about it, they’re only going to last for a certain period of time. They
need to be able to time out as well, and pieces of paper can’t do that.
You’ve
also alluded to having an audit trail, which seems to be part of the going
forward equation where we need to be able to understand how we validate and
then what is the trust mechanism on this. So it seems like you have some really
good partners that are engaged there and this is a model that can be emulated.
So what is your plan? How are you guys going to roll this out?
If you think
about it, everyone gets the test and then you get a particular result from the
test. The result could have a variety of options to it. So let’s be clear,
there’s people who’ve never had the test. So that’s one category of people.
There’s people that take the test and it turns out that they have the virus. So
clearly they’ve got to quarantine and take care of themselves and get the right
medical care. There’s people that take the test and do not have the virus, but
also don’t have the antibodies present. Then there’s people that take the test,
don’t have the virus, and do have the antibodies present. But the antibodies
could range in terms of how significant they are in one person versus another
based on a number of factors that the medical community is still quite frankly
sorting out.
The results
from the test will have to be deployed in different ways. So at first what
we’ll know for sure, and there’s really good science around it, is who has the
virus and who doesn’t. That’s the first standard. But clearly if you don’t have
the virus at the point you take the test, you could go somewhere an hour, two
hours, five minutes later and acquire the virus. So how do you test for that?
What use cases can use that data out of the gate? And there are some places
that could use that data out of the gate. So knowing that the people you’re
admitting to your place don’t have the virus, if you’ve properly cleaned your
place and you’re not worried about the virus being carried in, there is utility
to that to start getting the economy going.
As the
serological tests advance, and we wind up with a better test to reveal what the
antibodies are and agreement in the scientific community, medical communities
around what those antibody levels mean, that’s when we’ll be able to roll out
to the next phase of understanding what everyone’s antibody levels are and what
that would permit them to do. So our certification tool will mature as that
science matures. There are a variety of serological tests that are starting to
come out. I don’t think there’s uniform agreement in the medical community
around the veracity of what those tests would imply for your ability to return
to work, or to a plane, or to a sporting facility. That will come, but it will
come in short order. This is all going to evolve very, very rapidly as the mass
testing rolls out.
One of
the examples you shared with me earlier, you and I are both huge fans of Clear
because it just seems to solve a lot problems. Of course it was solving
problems different than this prior than a couple of months ago, but I have not
used Clear in a stadium. I know that Clear has been rolling itself out in
stadiums and I imagine there’s competitors to it, but explain how this will
work in that environment.
Yeah, so if
you think about the way Clear works — for anyone that’s listening and not
familiar with this, you scan your fingerprints, your irises, and you keep that
information inside of Clear’s database. And then when you go to check in to
TSA, instead of having to have the TSA agent verify who you are by looking at
your license, Clear has done that by looking at your biometrics and you get
passed through security considerably faster as a function of that. It works
similarly with sporting arenas where you can attach your ticket account to
Clear and instead of scanning your ticket, they scan your irises to get in. I
use it to go to the Cleveland Indians games and it works fantastically well.
Even renting a car, Hertz does it now too.
So what
would happen is that within the Clear accounts, and to be fair, we haven’t
spoken to Clear yet, but it’s clear, pun intended, how this would work. We
would be embedded inside of the barcode that is part of your ticket, which
would then be, obviously it’s linked to Clear. The way that we’re controlling
for privacy, because I think you have to think about privacy in this instance,
it’s not as if the arena needs to have your medical record. That is not the way
this will work. The way it works is that they set a standard for what they’re
comfortable with in letting people back in. We are just certifying that your
test meets that standard. We’re not sharing medical data, we’re not moving your
data around. The arena would set a standard that you’d have to meet in order
for them to feel comfortable letting you in and you either meet or don’t meet.
So it becomes binary that you are allowed in or you’re not allowed in.
It would
work the same way, by the way, for a barbershop or for your local store. They
will be able to control their profile and say, “Here’s what we’re
comfortable doing.” This is America after all, the enterprise should
control who they want to have in to their business. And certainly this is a
tool that would enable them to control for the health of the people entering
during this very different time.
So to use
your barber example. Are they scanning an app? Is that where they’re getting
this information?
Yeah, so
it’s a great example. So our solution for the barbers is not to imply that they
have a scanner, right? I don’t want small business to have to go out and incur
even more expense during a period like this. Instead they’d set up an account
within Vital Chain. They could then print off a QR code that as people come to
their facility, they’d use the QR code scanner on their phone, scan that QR
code. It immediately loops into their Vital Chain app and their Vital Chain app
says you’re approved or you’re not approved to enter this facility. And so that
eliminates the technical need for the barbershop to have to have a scanner. It
keeps it very simple for the consumer. And most importantly, it keeps the data in
the consumer’s hands. It’s the consumer’s data. There’s no reason why it should
have to be shared with every place you want to go enter.
But
certainly places are going to set standards for how you can enter them and you
need to be able to prove or certify to them that you’re able to go in. But you
need to control your own data. And that’s the big difference between us and
contact tracing. With contact tracing, it’s anything but your own data. I think
what people are fearful of with contact tracing is that all of a sudden, Apple
and Google find out I was near someone with COVID, they send me an alert and 30
seconds later I’m also getting advertisements to buy a ventilator. I don’t want
that. I don’t want them having that level of knowledge of my health.
I also don’t like the concept of being marketed to during this time. I think the fear is there that they would do it. I haven’t seen assurance that they won’t do it, but contact tracing is a very useful tool to figuring out how to eliminate hot spots. So that’s my point about this has to work in tandem, right? So we can keep the data private and contact tracing if it’s done on an opt in basis can be useful to reduce hot spots. It’s going to be a myriad of solutions that have to come together to really get rid of this virus and move us back into a state of normalcy.