PAGE_TITLE: 
	AEI Section 230 Spring Summit, Part II: Highlights from an Expert Panel Discussion on the Economic Value of Section 230 | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

On April 19, 2023, AEI hosted a half-day summit to identify where the policy zeitgeist is at on online content moderation policy given the consideration of two recent Supreme Court cases with major implications on how the internet as we know it functions. This blog series highlights the best moments from each discussion. The second panel of the day evaluated the economic ramifications of changes to the statute.
This panel of experts featured
Douglas Holtz-Eakin
, president of the American Action Forum;
Sarah Oh Lam
, senior fellow at the Technology Policy Institute;
Kate Tummarello
, executive director at Engine; and moderated by
Mark Jamison
.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of key highlights from that panel. You can watch the full event on
AEI.org
and read the full transcript
here
.
Mark Jamison: Doug, you’ve quantified some of what you see as the economic impacts of Section 230. Tell us what you found and why that matters.
Douglas Holtz-Eakin: Section 230 has enabled an enormous amount of very dynamic, competitive economic growth. And at this point, the internet economy is roughly $2.5 trillion—which is about 10 percent of US GDP— and employs something like 17 million people, depending on where you draw the boundaries. And it’s growing much more rapidly than the rest of the economy. If you look at the most recent numbers we could dig up, then from 2016 to 2020 it grew by 22 percent, where the economy itself was grinding along at 2-3 percent each year.
There is no question that touching Section 230 is going to have dramatic economic ramifications—and my biggest fear is that most of them will not be well understood.
Mark Jamison: If I were a small business, where content moderation, information, and algorithms, all mattered to me, what should I be worried about here?
Kate Tummarello: One of the things we always like to say is that the average seed stage startup, so that’s about a two-year-old startup who’s seen some success and is starting to seek outside funding has about $55,000 a month to spend on everything. That’s payroll, that’s rent, that’s equipment, that’s marketing, you name it. It has to fall in that $55,000.
A single lawsuit, even with Section 230 in place, over user content can cost tens of thousands of dollars to get dismissed. So even in the world we’re already living in without changing any laws, a startup that hosts user content could have at least a month of its funding wiped away by one lawsuit. If Section 230 were to change and a startup were to have to go through a full trial, even if they win that trial, that could cost hundreds of thousands of dollars. So that’s many multipliers of $55,000.
Mark Jamison: Tech regulation in Washington tends to focus on the major players, though. Is that a good idea? How does that play out in practice?
Douglas Holtz-Eakin: This has been a long-standing pet peeve of mine, this sort of fascination with special treatment of small firms under 50 employees. We do this a lot. But what we really are doing in the process is putting a tax on success, because we’re going to get rid of whatever the special provisions are, if you’re at all successful. And that just doesn’t make any sense. And so I’m really worried about it in this context.
The Section 230 framework is enormously appealing for two reasons to me. Number one, the focus is directly on the consumer. You moderate content to attract people to your platform. And the market rewards success in content moderation for that reason. That’s everything about market competition. This statute enables that tremendously, and it allows entry of competitors in a very successful fashion. And to damage that entry is to damage the ability to have effective competition.
Mark Jamison: As you look around the world, a lot of the other countries don’t have Section 230. What lessons are there as you compare the US to other jurisdictions?
Kate Tummarello: The US has the richest and most broadly accessible startup and innovation ecosystem in the world. Could we be improving it? Are there things we should be doing to make it better and more accessible? Absolutely. But globally, no one else holds a candle to us. So, that’s worth acknowledging and being proud of. I also think when people want to say things, like, “Well, internet platforms have figured out how to comply with hate speech laws in Germany, so why can’t we do that here outside of the First Amendment analysis,” which is incredibly important. I would ask “Have they? Is anyone besides the very large companies able to comply with the hate speech laws in Germany?”
If you have to hire a lot of content moderators, who are in the country, who know the culture, who know the language, who can kind of interact day to day with this stuff, that’s not something anyone else besides the large companies can afford to do. And you have to take into account the legal environment, especially in Europe, is very different. For better or worse, although I would argue for worse, we have a court system that is set up to encourage, if not litigation itself,
threats
of litigation, and especially around things like speech.
Mark Jamison: If this is a whole economy sort of thing, what else would be affected and how?
Sarah Oh Lam: Indeed—the internet is diverse. There are advertising businesses, there are encyclopedias, there are travel sites. It would be kind of a line-drawing exercise just to carve out even between small firms and big firms. But how do you measure small and big? Is it by revenues? Is it by impressions? Wikimedia is huge, but it doesn’t make a lot of money. So do you count that as the number of visitors that go to a website, and then you put the line there? Well, for the purposes of influence, perhaps it’s big. But then for purposes of revenue. And then small companies could be small in terms of viewers, but large in terms of revenues. Per user, they could be making much more money than other websites.
So with the line drawing exercise, it’s almost like you’d have to regulate every sector, advertisers, recommendation sites, YouTube, travel sites, and Nextdoor. And you see that in other regulations, like the Digital Markets Act in Europe, or privacy. And then even in the US, the proposed legislation, how do you really draw the lines without adverse effects? And then you’re going to have adverse selection, startups wanting to build in certain segments of the economy more than others. You lose that experimentation that has enabled so much innovation.
Mark Jamison: The previous panel talked a little bit about legislation in Texas and Florida. So, if you think about supply and demand for legislation, there’s certainly a demand for some sort of legal reforms in content moderation, and the states seem to be supplying that. What’s going on there?
Sarah Oh Lam: I think everyone’s watching the patchwork that’s happening across the states. Even Montana and Utah have new laws. And then there’s the biometric from privacy. And so each of the states want a piece of regulating the internet. And so you’re going to see more demand for Congress to say something, to have some general privacy rule, or to weigh in on content moderation. But I think it’ll be interesting to see how much of a patchwork will form. And because the internet is such a large part of our economy now, I mean, everything has a digital component. Brick-and-mortar shops have digital doorways or portals. And so everything does touch the internet.