PAGE_TITLE: 
	What You Need - and Need to Avoid - to Improve Cybersecurity in a Digital Shared Network Economy | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

The internet feels like a seamless world of information and interactions. Protecting information in the digital shared economy may also feel seamless if done right. Proactive coordination of the technology partners that enable these seamless interactions is the key to ensuring security is managed upfront. Regulation, however, can actually hurt more than it helps, as innovation in cybersecurity does best when regulators don’t run the show, but rather leave it to industry partners to coordinate their operations as part of a planned secure-network environment.
The impact of cloud computing on efficiency
Both native digital companies and companies that are migrating from old-style networks to digital business models are seeing the advantages of moving to a mixed system of proprietary and cloud network operations. Access to cloud computing, mobile platforms, and continuous data and analytics makes using the public cloud a very enticing proposition as long as it matches the security and risk management capabilities of a proprietary system.
Networks used to be a web of connections that transited or “hopped”through a coordination of contracted backbone operators. Now that public cloud services are increasingly seen as just as secure as in-house networks, we have more systems designed to incorporate public cloud computing as part of a coordinated network environment. Thanks to the agility and speed of public cloud networks, information is distributed faster to the end user.
The market for public cloud infrastructure as a service grew
51 percent last year
according to International Data Corporation’s research director, Deepak Mohan. The analysis firm Gartner predicts that the market for hyper-converged integrated systems will grow by
79 percent in 2016 alone
, implying that we can expect to see more aspects of organizations’ technology move from an in-house backbone network to a shared network. Gartner predicts this will be the mainstream way of running network operations in less than five years.
Let’s take a real-world example. The upcoming holidays mean increased marketing and transactions for a three-month period for many retail outlets. Rather than having an internal network operation that is over-provisioned to scale for this once-a-year activity, it makes more sense to enable a preconfigured auto scaled server environment. Using the public cloud infrastructure to meet consumer demand for holiday shopping on a real-time basis is more efficient for all parties. It can also be just as safe, provided that the network security plan is structured with data transfer and transaction security controls in mind.
The impact of cloud computing on cybersecurity
The introduction of a hybrid network environment of on-premise and cloud computing means that a combination of security controls needs to be addressed. It’s important to clarify who has responsibility for the data and transactions when it comes to security measures in this shared environment. Anyone operating in a hybrid environment needs to embrace an integrated security plan into their organization’s IT plan.
This means that keeping information secure is now a joint effort. Pre-existing infrastructure that was managed in house is being comingled with applications that run on a public cloud or in a co-located facility. Much of this information may be managed by third parties who now must be part of any private operations security policy plan.
A consistent security policy should span all environments, both on-premise and in the cloud to avoid making segmented decisions for internal controls versus cloud computing. This ensures compliance with data and security obligations across the networks and that data are protected while they transit through the combined network environment.
The role of regulation: Stay out of the way
Cybersecurity planning needs to be nimble enough to incorporate up-to-date technology among the digital strategy partners.  This is tough to do if the planning process needs government approved regulation to be successful. A strong strategic plan that incorporates security operations can be aided by best practices developed by industry partners or security experts, including the ability to respond swiftly to real-time threats.
As a matter of fact, centralizing cybersecurity planning through a government agency limits innovation. Recent hacks show us the problems of the lack of a plan. Those who have taken the time to provision their networks are silent winners today, but they also know they are a possible target for future attacks, and they plan knowing they need to protect all aspects of their digital presence.
Cybersecurity improvements are critical throughout network operations, from the network infrastructure to the end user’s digital device. The more we address these vulnerabilities as a collaborative effort, the more efficiencies are driven throughout the networks.
The evolution of private cybersecurity policies creates the need to protect the larger landscape beyond individual enterprise IT operations. As we move into an extended networked environment where there is a high level of interdependency among parts of the network it is important to create a working environment that encourages responsible protection of all levels of the digital shared economy. Regulation is a last resort, not a catalyst for innovation.
This post was originally published on TechPolicyDaily.