PAGE_TITLE: 
	Protecting the Internet from Political Agendas: Takeaways from the ICANN Meeting | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

The recent ICANN meeting in London highlighted two issues that appear unrelated on the surface but link current concerns about how to manage Internet Governance going forward.  One is the transition of the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) stewardship away from the U.S. Government, and the second is the Government Advisory Committee’s multi-meeting, dragged out discussion on the new Top Level Domains (TLDs) .wine/.vin.
A bit of background on the basics of the Internet name directory known as the IANA function. The process to change the top level domain names, which dates to 1988 when Jon Postel administered these functions, has six steps: 1) a request is submitted for a change in the root zone data records in IANA, it may be the addition of a new top level domain, or a change of current data regarding a current top level domain; 2) the requested change is authorized by the IANA function staff and sent to the U.S. Department of Commerce; 3) the requested change is authorized by the U.S. Department of Commerce staff who coordinate the IANA function process; 4) once authorized the root zone modification change is made by Verisign; 5) the new data is distributed into the root zone through the 13 root zone operators; 6) the root zone operators publish the new data so it can be populated and recognized globally throughout the Internet.
The transition of the IANA function away from the U.S. government changes the third element of that process by removing the U.S. Department of Commerce staff authorization and replacing it with a new entity that authorizes the change request.  The step may seem redundant, but it provides an important sanity check by ensuring that the request follows current policy guidelines and that the responsible computer servers are functioning and ready to accept the change in traffic. In other words, this step makes sure that the requested change is technically feasible.  Most of the time, it’s perfunctory, but it is an important step in ensuring policy and technical accuracy for the root zone function.
The root zone process works because the people who engage in it respect and abide by the rules.  They respect its limited technical role and understand the importance of its simple policy objectives.  For the transition away from the current U.S. Department of Commerce oversight model to be successful, the next stewards of this role must understand that this function is to be technically accurate and within the scope of the agreed upon policy.  Simply put, they must recognize that the IANA function is designed to be technical, not political.  If we agree to this premise, the IANA transition discussion should be about who takes over the authorization of a technical function, nothing more.
So what does this have to do with France’s objection to adding the new Top Level Domain (TLD) for .wine/.vin into the root zone?  This elongated squabble stems from  a long fought issue in trade negotiations regarding geographic indicators and marketing rules.  France and the European Commission, upset with those trade rules, have brought the issue to ICANN in the hope of preventing .wine/.vin from entering the root zone unless the operator agrees to limit the domain names along geographic lines.  For example Chablis would be used only for those wine producers in the specific region of Chablis, France, and a Chablis lovers wine club in Greece could not have the name Chablis.  In ICANN, the French and European Government Advisory Council representatives have found a venue for this discussion that receives media attention and, they believe, will be a lever for change. They are now pushing their point until someone tells them to stop.  ICANN does not have jurisdiction over trade disputes, and no one wants ICANN to have a say in trade negotiations.  Here is the dilemma though: if governments agreed to respect ICANN’s policy guidelines, which the ICANN community agreed upon through the multistakeholder process, France would not be able to continually attempt to block the entrance of the .wine or .vin domain names into the root zone.
We need to know that the European Commission and its government colleagues understand this is a technical coordinating organization.  If governments are willing to bring an issue from outside of the technical functions of the Internet into ICANN, how do we trust them to keep the IANA function purely technical and to stay away from the temptation to use it as a political lever?
If France wants to protect its geographic indicators on wine labels, it needs to continue negotiations with its global partners in the world of trade agreements, not technical Internet functions.  The temptation to settle a commercial trade issue through Internet Governance will be just the beginning of mass political misappropriation of the largest economic tool that we have seen in this century – the Internet.