PAGE_TITLE: 
	The State of Our Nation’s Cybersecurity: Highlights from My Conversation with Michael Chertoff | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Cyber threats are multidimensional; they can manifest as large-scale
attacks carried out by nation states or private actors, targeted at critical infrastructure
or individual devices. In the information age, they can also target vulnerable
individuals via malware or on social media platforms in the form of false or
misleading information. Across the board, the Russia-Ukraine conflict has made
plugging vulnerabilities in all cyber domains a lead priority for government,
industry, and civil society alike.
On our latest episode of “Explain to Shane,” I sat down with
Michael
Chertoff
, former Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS),
for an update on how both cybersecurity threats and best practices have
progressed in a number of domains since Secretary Chertoff left office. We also
discussed the security pitfalls of Congress’s attempts to weaken mobile device
protections in the name of competition.
Below is an edited and abridged transcript of our talk. You can listen to
this
and
other episodes
of “Explain to Shane” on AEI.org and subscribe via your
preferred listening platform
. You can also read the full transcript of our discussion
here
. If you enjoyed this episode, leave us a review, and tell your friends and colleagues to tune in.
Shane Tews: Secretary Chertoff,
welcome to the show. Can you give us an overview of how both cyber threats and
management of cyberattacks have changed since your time at DHS?
Michael Chertoff: When I was secretary, the internet was still
relatively young as a commercial activity. There was the possibility of
criminal groups stealing identification information or moving money illicitly.
There was a sense that we might have theft of intellectual property, but it was
not viewed as a major security threat in the same way terrorism was.
At one point, a senior intelligence official informed the president that
our adversaries could use the internet to shut down parts of the banking system
or the American economy in a way that would be comparable to what we’d
experienced as a result of 9/11. The president, as a result, had me and a
number of others put together a national cybersecurity strategy. We began to
look at the possibility of cyberattacks not just being about theft of money or
information, but about interfering with operating systems. Systems increasingly
connected to the internet that turned on the lights or ran the water could be
tampered with or shut down. So this elevated from a criminal issue into a national
security challenge.
What are some lessons learned in
the cyber domain from the Russia-Ukraine situation?
The Russians were early to weaponize the internet and add cyberattacks
to the menu of tools they used in hybrid warfare situations that fell just
short of armed conflict. When I was in office in 2007, there was a popular
movement in Estonia to take down a statue memorializing Soviet activity during World
War II. The Russians got angry and launched a cyberattack that shut down Estonia’s
government offices and banking system, then we worked with the Estonians under
our NATO obligations to help them recover.
In 2008, the Russians attacked parts of Georgia to try to break them
away from the main country, and cyberattacks were involved too. So we witnessed
the beginning of the weaponization of the internet by Russia; since then, they’ve
been quite willing to use the internet as a means of inflicting real-world harm
on their adversaries.
Ukraine has had the misfortune of being a Petri dish for Russian cyberattacks over the last several years. Before the most recent invasion, there were attacks on Ukraine’s electrical grid. There was a ransomware attack called
NotPetya
, which infected an accounting software package that most big companies operating in Ukraine use. It froze all of their data, and collateral damage was felt by Western companies with offices in Ukraine.
And, as the DHS has warned, we have now found traces of Russian cyber
activity on our electrical grid. Warnings have gone out from the US government
to the private sector—particularly the financial and energy sectors—to be on
alert for possible attacks.
If you’re a company in today’s
risk-filled environment, how do you maximize your cybersecurity and offensive
functionality?
You have to consider which of your assets are most likely to be
attractive to an adversary. Depending on the nature of your business unit, the
adversary may be different. It’s a reasonable concern, for example, that the
Russians may decide at some point they’re better off attacking the financial
sector than trying to continue participating in it. The financial, energy, and healthcare
sectors should be alert for nation-state adversaries looking to shut them down.
Other types of businesses may be more prone to criminal theft of data
and intellectual property. For example, when China conducts cyber operations,
they collect huge amounts of personal data, some of which they do overtly and some
of which they do covertly. They attacked the Office of Personnel Management—at least
my assumption is that it was them—and stole background check files with very
detailed information about 25 million potential or current US government
employees. They also hacked into major healthcare databases. China is building
a huge artificially intelligent database about all Americans so they will know
everything about you and can decide who’s an intelligence target and who’s a
counterintelligence target. It’s not like they’re looking to shut down a
personnel system; they’re looking to glean information from it.
The Russians are much heavier handed and more interested in ransomware or destructive attacks. They’re quite skilled. The US government publicly named Russian intelligence as the culprit of the attack on
SolarWinds
, a software management company that did supply chain work for thousands of enterprises online. The Russians created a backdoor (or skeleton key) that would allow them, at their option, to enter into targets they were interested in.
Companies need to analyze: What are your key assets? Which adversaries
want to penetrate your systems in order to get those assets? You then need to
build an architecture of security that is tailored to the particular tactics
and techniques said adversaries typically use.
As DHS is telling companies to put their “
Shields Up
,” tech antitrust proposals in Congress would weaken mobile security by requiring e-commerce operators let users download any software onto their devices (“sideload”) in the name of competition. What are your thoughts about that?
The general concern here is that the Internet of Things has made
everything wirelessly connected and “smart,” like your baby camera,
refrigerator, and home security system. That creates more surface area for
attacks. Once an adversary gets into the network, there is no limit to how far
they can go. Some years ago in Washington, an institution that I will not name
got hacked by a foreign entity through its thermostat, which then gave the
hacker a route to the database. So you have to worry about the surface area.
One area of concern is the mobile phone. There is sensitivity about
whether something can be brought in sideways through an app that will then
infect the phone. Most of the big tech companies try to vet and check any apps
in the app store so that you have a reasonable degree of confidence that the
app does not have vulnerabilities, is not infected with malware, and doesn’t
have a widely known exploit that can be used by a bad actor. The problem with
bringing in apps from app stores that are not vetted or simply going on the
internet and downloading anything is: You’re putting yourself at risk because
you don’t know the safety and security of the app you’re downloading. Making
sure you can give people confidence is more important than giving everybody the
opportunity to simply move anything in sideways that they want.
Some people say if you want to take a risk with your phone and download
anything, that’s on you. The problem is: It’s not just a risk on your phone. If
your phone gets infected, the nature of the infection may ultimately wind up
allowing someone to take over your email and use that to fool your friends and
get them to download things. So we ought to think twice about this.
What are your thoughts on how to
combat disinformation—another cyber-adjacent threat that’s particularly
relevant these days given the Russia-Ukraine conflict?
Disinformation
has been enabled and weaponized because of the ability to use data to target
you, the consumer. We’ve always had propaganda. Even a hundred years ago, the
Russians were out there doing propaganda, but in a gross sense and aimed at
everybody. They had to reflect it in a way that was more broadly appealing and less
persuasive. But now they can send you something tailored exactly to your
concerns and interests to get your attention and draw you in further to
intensify and amplify the message they want to send.
Platforms ought to put a warning out when there is disinformation like
that. But we also need to regulate the way data can be disseminated to third
parties and used. I think the federal government as a whole is going to have to
look at how we give people control over their data even if someone else has collected
it. Moving to that model may afford us some hope in putting a break on the
weaponization of our data.
Along with weaponization of data and disinformation, we have
polarization. I hate to blame the internet for everything, but it gets people
amped up. The only time period I can think of that this reminds me of is the
1960s. We had assassinations. We had a war. We had riots. We had terrorism. We
had bombs. There was a sense of alarm about the future of the country. But one
thing we did not have were major political figures essentially applauding
activity that we would consider terroristic or violent. Now, to my regret, a number
of prominent politicians are either silent about violence or in some ways willing
to applaud theories like the “great replacement,” which are fueling shooters
like the guy in Buffalo.
Across the entire globe, over the last several years, there has been a
steady decline in democracy and human rights with only a few notable
exceptions. I’m encouraged when I see the public getting out there and demonstrating
and fighting for their rights. But all too often, we see someone getting
elected and using their position to insulate and cement themselves in power.
Hungary’s Viktor Orbán is a good example.
Autocracy doesn’t necessarily come at the point of a gun or a military
coup; it starts with a public that is willing to elect people who are
expressing views that are hostile to human rights. That person then uses the
leverage of an elected position to shut down the press, harass their opponents,
and insulate themselves so they can stay in power.