PAGE_TITLE: 
	How to Build Data Privacy Trust Between Businesses and Customers | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Seven months have elapsed since the implementation of the EU’s privacy regulation, the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). In response, businesses are trying to protect themselves from costly penalties such as the $57 million fine imposed on Google last week by France’s data protection authority. Some small European companies are choosing not to hold any customer data because of concerns about the responsibilities mandated by the GDPR, and some US companies are avoiding European consumer data by requiring that users provide a ZIP code to access online content.
via Twenty20
With the California Consumer Privacy Act set to go into effect in January 2020, many businesses are weighing the pros and cons of the data they collect and use as part of their operations. As policymakers weigh federal privacy legislation, here are some key factors government and industry should keep in mind regarding privacy, data security, and data collection practices.
The importance of transparency
Businesses that collect and monetize consumer data need to be transparent with consumers about their behavior. Current privacy concerns often revolve around data that has been collected without well-defined and transparent terms of use. Companies should use clear, concise language rather than tens of pages of legal terms to ensure that consumers can understand how information is collected, processed, stored, and potentially shared with other parties. This would allow consumers to evaluate the costs and benefits of a transaction by applying their own personal level of concern for data privacy. Monetizing a customer’s data is not always seen as a negative if the customer sees a benefit from the transaction, such as free shipping or more personalized customer service. A business that collects consumer data should make it apparent to consumers that their data are being managed responsibly, securely, and within industry-specific guidelines (if applicable).
How technology can help
To ensure that privacy policies and future regulatory actions have the desired outcome of protecting consumers and ensuring data security, all levels of government need to be informed about the importance of data in today’s society. If policymakers are too prescriptive in their legislation about types of technologies or the specific uses of data, there could be dire consequences for future technologies and innovation. For example, new
methods
that promise to allow encrypted data sharing between multiple parties are already being tested by government and commercial security specialists. In addition to enhancing security for both consumers and the businesses managing the data, widespread use of enhanced encryption would make the criminal activity of harvesting data from businesses more difficult and less lucrative, given how markets for stolen data on the dark web are currently flourishing.
The role of government
When businesses are obligated by regulations (and punitive fines) to publicly disclose when information is lost or stolen, they are incentivized to improve the controls and procedures in place to ensure the safety of the data residing on their networks. For firms in industries handling highly sensitive data such as banking and health care — which are already subject to specific cyber-risk regulations to show accountability for the data they retain on customers — this is a major benefit.
The world of digital commerce will need to develop the same consumer confidence moving forward by using consistent data retention language that is transparent and understandable. The National Institute of Standards and Technology has been helping with this goal by developing a
Privacy Framework
, collecting information on industry best practices and technology tools so that it can review and recommend the best voluntary principles and guidelines. With this information businesses can “better identify, assess, manage, and communicate about privacy risks” as part of a data protection program to enjoin confidence and trust with consumers. These principles are designed to highlight the benefits innovative technologies can bring to consumers’ lives while understanding the privacy needs of individuals. Harmonizing data protection standards across industries will help clear confusion surrounding conflicting language in service agreements, data retention, and data aggregation. These new guidelines will create accountability for the use of personal data that businesses have collected and ensure transparency on how data are maintained or used by their systems.
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) will continue to be the appropriate agency to enforce any national privacy regulations. The FTC can ensure data are appropriately protected, and when harmful incidents or breaches are disclosed, that the proper steps are taken to notify the consumers of any risks to their personal information. Any new privacy regulations should be accompanied by the appropriate funding for the FTC to review and enforce requirements on data collectors.
The government’s role should be to promote transparent privacy practices and essential security practices to enhance consumer trust by holding businesses that collect data accountable. Any federal privacy legislation or regulations in 2019 should implement guidelines that protect consumers and adhere to established industry cybersecurity practices. Privacy needs to go hand-in-glove with data security practices.