PAGE_TITLE: 
	JP Morgan’s Cyber Breach: Did They Strike the Right Information-sharing Balance? | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Yesterday’s disclosure by JP Morgan Chase of a cyber-security breach that affected
76 million households and 7 million small businesses
did not take the form of a formal announcement or press release.  Instead, it was revealed in an “
8-K Report
“filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission and a
posting on the company’s web site
. The compromised data included “user contact information – name, address, phone number and email address,”as well as unspecified “internal JPMorgan Chase information relating to such users.”However, the filing reports, account numbers, passwords, user IDs, dates of birth or Social Security numbers were not compromised. What JP Morgan isn’t reporting is what happened to the data, who has it now, and how they got it.
According to press reports, JP Morgan Chase believes that the hackers “sat”inside its systems for over a month learning the road maps of the servers, and potentially siphoned off data throughout this period.  All of this happened months ago in June, but was not discovered until July.
One takeaway from this episode is the absence of clear guidelines, or even a shared understanding, about what information should be shared, with whom, and on what schedule. Most network operators of JP Morgan’s size and sophistication are working to secure their systems with best-in-class security systems. Second generation cybersecurity doesn’t wait for human intervention to know there is a problem, but instead relies on  automated real-time network information gathering and dissemination combined with  predictive analytics, scanning data logs from routers and firewalls, and capturing behavior patterns as they are happening. This real-time monitoring and analysis allows the system to decide whether it should quarantine the traffic flow to unknown users or individuals that are seeking data that is out of scope for that user.
It’s great news that the time sequence from attack to mitigation has been reduced to seconds for those using this technology.  The challenge now is deciding who to tell in the event of a data breach, and when to tell them. It is not obvious that sharing such information publicly is an effective way to stop future attacks, as opposed to more limited sharing within industry designed to help to build a better defense.  Nor is it clear that consumers benefit from disclosures about events that are unlikely to result in their being harmed and provide little or no guidance on how they can better protect themselves.
The
SEC guidance
to announce a breach is part of the government’s attempt to define the right time and place for public disclosure.  What it does not do is trigger a set of government regulations to mitigate the announced breach.  And that is actually a good thing; once government starts dictating solution sets, technology innovators will be held back from creating faster, more intelligent defense tools.  We don’t want a static technology response to cyberattacks, we want to build the most secure network possible, which will be a flexible and continuously improving process if done right.
Our current regulatory process around cybersecurity breaches is limited because the problem is not static; It’s a dynamic challenge of cyber cops and robbers.  We need to reinforce the importance of managing risks and of allowing for rewards to those who help strengthen the system by reporting data loss and security breaches.
No one wants their data out in the open to be used by cyber thieves.  But we need to understand that what makes continuous network operation advancement work is a cooperative environment that allows for information to be shared at the right level and for the development of best-in-class, constantly improving protections.  It is a good thing, for example, that JPMorgan Chase contacted the FBI and the Secret Service about the breach.
Ongoing problems with network breaches remind us of the need to continue developing and improving on our real-time capabilities to detect and defend against data breaches and not punish the companies that choose to share information in order to help develop better tools for ensuring the security of network operations.
This post was originally published on TechPolicyDaily.