PAGE_TITLE: 
	Answering the Paris Call: An Important Step for US Cybersecurity Leadership | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

By Shane Tews and Ivana Stradner
The
Paris Call for Trust and Security in Cyberspace
was
launched in 2018 by French President Emmanuel Macron with the goal of promoting
a multi-stakeholder, multilateral solution to improve trust, security, and
stability in cyberspace. When this public call for global action was made in
2018, the US did not answer it. But this past month, the Biden administration
changed the US position when Vice President Kamala Harris
endorsed
the Paris Call in person during a meeting with
Macron.
French President Emmanuel Macron and US Vice President Kamala Harris meet in Paris, France, November 12, 2021, via Reuters
Cybercrime
costs
the US and Europe billions of dollars per year and
generates
trillions in profits for criminals. Cybercrime
was front-page news after an attack
derailed
critical American infrastructure earlier this
year; the Paris Call specifically calls out this type of activity as contrary
to the international document’s guidance for global security. It
specifically
calls out “indiscriminate or systemic harm to individuals and critical
infrastructure,” which would include shutting down an electric grid.
Unsurprisingly, the US government has been trying for some
time to find a range of solutions to deter malign cyber actors through bilateral
and multilateral channels. By answering the Paris Call, the US will now
participate in collaborative efforts to combat cybercrime and “make
cyberspace
a free, secure, and open place.” But is this the
ultimate solution to America’s cyber woes?
While the Paris Call represents a symbolic step in the right
direction, its aims are limited in scope. The Paris Call has been framed as a
nonbinding declaration full of nice ideas — namely, that we should work
together to tackle new threats; agree to the fundamental rights and principles
the United Nations (UN) pledges its member governments to (but in cyberspace);
protect the internet, individuals, and infrastructure from harm; defend
electoral processes; prevent retaliatory hacks; strengthen international norms;
and — where corporations were very eager to sign on — defend intellectual
property.
For the Biden administration, this effort falls squarely
into its
stated
priority
of renewing the transatlantic relationship and
strengthening America’s engagement with the international community on cyber
issues. The declaration has joint support from the European Union’s 27 member
states and now the US. Encouraging collaboration in the Paris Call appears to
be in everyone’s best interest, so why is it unlikely that this document will
make a major difference in the cybersecurity challenge?
First, this is a nonbinding agreement that lacks a
supranational authority to enforce international legal obligations. Regardless,
we should perceive it as a coordination platform on which states and nonstate
actors can communicate their cybersecurity needs and make security of digital
assets a top priority.
Second, although some countries have refused to support the
Paris Call, major tech companies including Facebook, Google, Hewlett-Packard,
International Business Machines, Microsoft, and even Moscow-based Kaspersky Lab
have
joined
because they see an opportunity to limit risk liability through a
multi-stakeholder set of agreements on international cyber norms — that
include
nation-states — to deter cybercrime, espionage,
data theft, and attacks against individuals and infrastructure.
Third, without the support of countries such as China, Iran,
or Russia — notorious for their malign behaviors in cyberspace — the Paris Call
might become another instance of democratic states preaching to the choir.
Fourth, and finally, the Paris Call is open to all states,
but China and Russia refused to join it because it promotes human rights on the
internet and promises to counter election hacking. Instead, Russia (with
China’s support) is
leading
the UN Open-Ended Working Group’s cybersecurity
proceedings. Russia has since used this body to further its favored positions
on cyber issues — especially “
cyber sovereignty
.” As negotiations on the global
cybercrime treaty will continue at the UN in 2022, Russia will compel its
friends to support its agenda in UN subcommittees with the help of China, with
whom it has
repeatedly
affirmed
shared autocrat-friendly values for cyberspace.
Cyber threats aren’t going away. If the Paris Call can be a
catalyst to improve cybersecurity for individuals, businesses, and
nation-states, it’s at least a starting point for establishing real security
norms. The Paris Call’s aims are undoubtedly laudable, but we should not be
overly idealistic and treat it as a panacea for all global cybersecurity
problems. Instead, we should be realistic and perceive it as a diplomatic
document and convenient platform for furthering negotiations and understanding
different cybersecurity needs among different stakeholders.
As China and Russia continue to hijack UN processes to
further their favored cybersecurity positions with the goal of drafting a new
global treaty, the US should use the admittedly flawed Paris Call to promote
trust and security in cyberspace through strengthening transatlantic tech
relations and developing a coalition of the willing to counter the Sino-Russian
cybersecurity coup that is building momentum at the UN.