PAGE_TITLE: 
	Who Is the WHOIS For? | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

In February, I
wrote
about the impact the EU’s General Data Privacy Regulation (GDPR) would have on the management of information related to international data transfers. To review, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) has administered an important database of information on the hundreds of millions of domain names that have been created since 1995 — the “who’s who” of web addresses — known as the WHOIS. The WHOIS database was conceived as a list of administrative and technical contacts for parties that leased domain names, but it quickly became the primary public record for registered domain name information used for research and investigations on websites used for fraud, cybercrime, spam, phishing, bot attacks, copyright and trademark infringement, and general misinformation.
Andrea Jelinek, head of the European Data Protection Board created by GDPR, at a news conference in Brussels, Belgium May 25, 2018 – via REUTERS
Challenges from the GDPR
Historically, ICANN contractual obligations for registries and registrars (the contracted parties who manage the leasing of domain names) call for the administration and technical contact in the WHOIS database to be made public. However, the historic openness of the WHOIS database has been challenged by the implementation of the GDPR, and an overly broad interpretation of the definition of “natural person” in the new European privacy law. Registries and registrars are struggling with the GDPR and determining who is responsible if a fine is levied for the collection of information required by ICANN contracts.
Since ICANN is not recognized in the EU as a data controller, it is not in a position to protect the contracting parties if there’s a question of who is at legal fault if an ICANN accredited registry or registrar is found to be in violation of the GDPR. The conflict arises due to the contractually mandated information when a domain name is registered that includes a contact name, address, phone number, mailing address, and email address of the business or entity. This information often constitutes the same data that may not be collected on a “natural person” by EU standards, but in the US, this information is considered business data for the domain name registrant purchasing the use of the domain name.
Developing a standardized model for access to both public, and now non-public, registration data that is compliant with both GDPR regulations as well as ICANN contracts continues to be a challenge. ICANN’s multi-stakeholder community is working on an emergency policy development process to find a path forward for managing this friction between EU law and ICANN’s current contractual obligation for open WHOIS data.
The main focus for the community are the rules around creating a unified access model that would address accreditation, authentication, access, and accountability of the information gathered and managed by the contracted parties. This model would be supported by multiple members of the multi-stakeholder community, including the Government Advisory Committee, the Business Constituency, and the Intellectual Property Constituency, while working through specific issues with the contracted parties and Non-Commercial Users Constituency. A unified access model would allow accredited, legally eligible third parties such as law enforcement, cybercrime investigators, and academic and legal researchers access to WHOIS data they need.
The internet at a crossroads
The internet has been at the crossroads of conflict between free access to information and the freedom-of-speech protections for decades. International data flows and retention are critical for interoperable platforms. More flexibility in how data are managed will also help with artificial intelligence research that helps protect the internet infrastructure’s cybersecurity culture. Most researchers do not know what identifying information datasets may contain until they have collected the data, often from third parties. This recent ICANN WHOIS dilemma demonstrates how the lack of clarity around what information can be made public and where the legal nexus is located challenges what rules apply. With the EU Data Protection Board seeing a difference between legal and natural persons that the US does not recognize, a new risk factor for businesses and hurdle for researchers has been introduced for the managers of internet resources and the big data opportunities it creates.
These ongoing discussions focus on the need for legal certainty that would ensure third parties have continued reasonable access to information in the WHOIS database while appeasing the EU members’ data controllers. The framework for the unified access model is seeking a delicate balance between the interests of parties needing business certainty around their record-keeping obligations and the risks around the new privacy rights of European citizens.
National Telecommunications and Information Administration Assistant Secretary David Redl
noted
during the 61st ICANN meeting in March that the WHOIS is “an incredibly valuable tool for governments, businesses, intellectual property rights holders, and Internet users around the world.” Redl noted that the US government would like to see the preservation of the WHOIS service with as much registration data as possible, and that access to the information be granted quickly for legitimate purposes.
It’s important to note that all the parties working on a harmonized access system are looking to balance the right amount of control in their approach as they institute an authentication mechanism that will employ security safeguards around who has access to the data and what is shared for non-public WHOIS data.
The digital economy needs new innovative tools to tackle challenges while maintaining the integrity of the internet. Updating the WHOIS rules with guidance on who can gather data and what the appropriate registered authorities are allowed to share about customers will ensure those who have permission to review full WHOIS records have been authenticated for appropriate access to the data.
Working together and recognizing the need for collaboration among the constituencies of the multi-stakeholder community and their goals could bring us to a level of agreement among the governing authorities who all have a hand in this information-sharing challenge. Finding the right balance between palatable risk and maintaining open access to information could help combat cybercrime while protecting internet users’ privacy. And that should be the goal of all stakeholders in the digital economy.