PAGE_TITLE: 
	Just like Happiness, Cybersecurity Is a Choice | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

The “internet of things”promises great rewards to anyone daring enough to connect. It might seem that the more devices we link up and the more data points we send across the network, the more vulnerable we are to hackers and thieves. But does this need to be the case?
Is the internet of things inherently too risky?
Clearly, the internet of things poses a major security challenge. This is especially true as we move from fairly simple devices to those that are more capable and able to continually interact with each other on the network.
The sheer number of devices expected to connect is a major challenge. Not only will there be billions of them, they will be incredibly heterogeneous and decentralized in their points of access. Furthermore, small-device manufacturers often opt not to implement security measures in order to save battery life and space.
The cherry on top in what seems to be a disaster waiting to happen is that the type of data we send over the IoT will become increasingly sensitive – we’re talking health, banking, and location information. Are we headed for doom and gloom?
We have the technology!
Our IoT future doesn’t need to be as volatile and insecure as the above might indicate. Think about the security of the ATM system, where different and unaffiliated banks are willing to become partners of a system handling something as delicate as people’s money. In this system, banks and consumers trust both the hardware devices that distribute the cash and the networks that control the information flowing in and out of your personal account. We feel secure using this system because it is secured at every level; the ATMs themselves, the banks and their networks, and the cards that end users hold all have built-in security measures. We can also track and mitigate any security concern at multiple layers in the transaction path.
Just like in the ATM system, the technology needed to protect the IoT is readily available today. Most obviously, the devices themselves need to have security features built in. However, there are many other points in the system where we have the opportunity to add security.
For many IoT devices, a smartphone is the ultimate end user access control of choice. Think of a Nest thermostat’s ability to control your home’s temperature remotely. Or of having a wearable or local sensor that notes your arrival and queues up a change in lighting or access to a secured area. Adding a layer of security here, at the end user level, would contribute significantly to IoT security.
We can – and should – also add a layer of security to the pathway between the user and the end device. Enter cloud computing. The gate-keeper capabilities of cloud computing allow us to incorporate a measure of minimum-security requirements to enable authentication and encryption. Using cloud computing, a corporation, enterprise, hospital, home, or city government could create a regular audit of how many connected devices they have or want to place on a network and create a regular assessment of how they are best protected.
We even have the opportunity to use the Domain Name System to add a layer of security and authentication to the identity of a user, or to use blockchain to show “providence”or chain of custody throughout a transaction.
Securing the IoT is perfectly doable, we just need to choose the right path
We already have the capability to build a next generation internet, one that is secure and worthy of our trust without adding too much friction to the flow of information. All we have to do is choose the right path. And we need to do it together. Protecting the network is not just the job of network operators. At every link in the chain, from device manufacturers to end-users, we have the opportunity to add more security. If we do this, reaping the benefits of the IoT will be a less risky endeavor.
This post was originally published on TechPolicyDaily.