PAGE_TITLE: 
	The US and the Digital Future at the International Telecommunication Union | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

On November 1, member states of the United Nations’ International Telecommunication Union (ITU) elected Doreen Bogdan-Martin to serve as director of the ITU’s Development Bureau beginning in January 2019. Bogdan-Martin will be the first woman to serve on the ITU as a top official, giving the US a “
voice in ITU leadership for the first time in three decades
.” While many players in the technology space see the ITU as an international policy body that is no longer necessary, there are still reasons the US government and technology industry should engage with it.
via Twenty20.
The
ITU
was created in 1865 to manage international telegraph networks, but as new technologies were invented, the management of international radio frequency spectrum, broadcast signals, maritime and aeronautical mobile communications, and geostationary orbit slots for communications satellites became part of its mandate. Today it consists of three sectors — development, radio communication, and telecommunications — which together create policies, standards, and regulations and coordinate on global issues related to information and communication technologies (ICTs). Together, the sectors manage the allocation of “global radio spectrum and satellite orbits, develop the technical standards that ensure networks and technologies seamlessly interconnect, and strive to improve access to ICTs to underserved communities worldwide.”
As the internet has become the key technology for global communications, how the ITU fits into the global communications standards process has become an interesting consideration. The internet is a network of networks designed to flow to the easiest point of transmission, and the geographic location of the hardware that provides connectivity and the accompanying geopolitical power of having internet data flow through certain geographical areas has become an area of interest for the ITU. It wants to use its initial mandate of helping the flow of communications across borders to bring internet transmissions under its umbrella as well.
While the value of the ITU beyond its narrow remit can be questioned given today’s technology, there are geopolitical reasons for the US to keep a seat at the table. With global interest increasing in issues such as the need for cybersecurity standards for the Internet of Things, increasing investment for international internet connectivity for infrastructure, and standards agreements for both wired and wireless communications, the election of Bogdan-Miller gives the US an important voice in ITU’s leadership and its decision-making process. As National Telecommunications and Information Administration Assistant Secretary David Redl
noted
earlier this year, the government also wants to “re-elect the United States to the ITU Council. . . . [It] serves the critical function of supervising the overall management and administration of the Union, and continued U.S. representation will provide a vital mechanism for advancing U.S. interests at the ITU.”
During the next two weeks at the ITU plenipotentiary meetings, more than 2,500 participants, including heads of governments and communications ministries from 193 countries, and hundreds of private companies and academic institutions, will work together on shaping the global digital future. Their challenge will be finding the right paths for collaboration while reserving the rights of stakeholders to make decisions about implementation and development at the local level.
Harmonizing communications assets at the very basic level that can provide connectivity should be the main objective of the ITU’s efforts. ICTs are still distributed unevenly throughout the world for many cultural and commercial reasons. In many areas of the world, the best connectivity opportunities have leapfrogged from nothing to wireless satellite connections with all their accompanying benefits, but this requires investment. The disparity in telecommunications service between rural and urban areas is a challenge for all countries, but having basic agreed-on technical standards helps bring investors to the table.
There is a clear link between telecommunications investment and economic growth. Having access to communications assets means fostering investment at a local level and enables economic expansion by giving individuals better access to information and the ability to create wealth through new applications and mobile connectivity. As major advances in technology create opportunities, countries will need interoperable networks to properly integrate technology in new locations.
As more people connect to the internet for activities such as mobile banking, health care, e-government, education, the Internet of Things, and applications related to artificial intelligence and automation, all can benefit from international cooperation and collaboration brought about by the ITU. The US is fortunate to have a seat at the table and has the opportunity to use the multinational capabilities of the ITU when it can to move global public policy for technology forward. At the same time, in areas that belong to sovereign states or private-sector operators, the US should have the ability to keep engagement on these issues before the appropriate technical and policy development organizations.
The Internet Society put it well in a recent
op-ed
, saying that “we need new models of collaboration.” There will be plenty of opportunities to seek high-level collaboration when appropriate on digital issues at this plenipotentiary — to study the best practices for mitigating risk and taking advantage of the transformative nature of technology. The US has positioned itself well for cooperation across international boundaries when dictated by the technology while managing the transformative frameworks for economic and social change through a democratic, global, and free-market process.