PAGE_TITLE: 
	Clearing Obstacles to America’s 5G Wireless Future: A Conversation with FCC Commissioner Brendan Carr | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Event Summary
On Monday, Commissioner Brendan Carr visited AEI to discuss the importance of fifth-generation (5G) wireless technology and the Federal Communications Commission’s (FCC) efforts to make sure the US is ready for 5G from a regulatory perspective.
In a discussion with AEI’s Shane Tews, Commissioner Carr explained the FCC’s work on reducing regulatory costs and barriers to deploying small cells and 5G wireless networks and its efforts to work with state and local governments to speed 5G deployment in urban and rural areas. He discussed infrastructure challenges facing the US in the global race with China (and others) to 5G, and he expressed his belief that a combination of reducing regulations, making the most spectrum available, and using America’s free-market system would allow the US to reap the benefits of winning the race.
The expert panel that followed discussed how 5G small cells work, 5G’s massive economic promise, the importance of deploying 5G for national security reasons, and the wave of innovation that would occur in the country that wins the race to 5G. They also previewed technologies that 5G would make possible and discussed legislative solutions in Congress for ensuring spectrum availability and cutting-edge wireless infrastructure in rural areas.
— Matt Au
Event Description
The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has a key role in the United States’ transition to fifth-generation (5G) wireless technologies and infrastructure. New technologies and devices connecting to the internet as part of the Internet of Things will radically increase the amount of traffic on the network, and important applications such as self-driving cars and health applications will rely on 5G to function.
On Monday, September 17, FCC Commissioner Brendan Carr will visit AEI to discuss the FCC’s efforts to clear regulatory hurdles to enable US leadership in 5G deployment and ensure wireless spectrum needed for 5G technologies is made available. An expert panel discussing these issues will follow.
Join the conversation on social media by following @AEI and @AEItech on
Twitter
and
Facebook
.
If you are unable to attend, we welcome you to watch the event live on this page. Full video will be posted within 24 hours.
VIDEO