PAGE_TITLE: 
	Why I’m Out of Step with My Generation | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Among my millennial friends, and even more so for Gen Z, it’s common to believe that the United States is in terminal decline. But I remain an outlier because I think the United States’ best days could still be ahead. The country faces challenges, to be sure, but we have an abundance of resources and minds to meet those challenges. In this inaugural issue of
Techne
, I want to explain why I’m optimistic.
The stubbornness of American abundance.
We have so much in the United States.
Depending on how you count it, the United States is either No.1 or No. 2
in total arable land
. We are a top cereal and a top
agricultural exporter
. And the United States contains most of North America’s
chernozem belt
, a region of intensely productive soil.
The United States has
the second largest mineral wealth
in the world, estimated at $45 trillion. While most of that wealth is in coal and timber, we have substantial deposits of copper, lead, molybdenum, phosphates, rare earth elements, uranium, bauxite, iron, nickel, potash, and many other minerals that make the modern world.
We are a large, wealthy country close to the equator. I think most are surprised to learn
that Kansas City
has more sun hours in a year (2,814) than
Rome
(2,470). All of that sun means solar power, which has been a boon for the
renewable power source
in places like Texas.
The United States is also energy independent for the first time since the early 1950s. Investments have led to a boom in crude oil and natural gas production.
Since 2019
, exports have been higher than imports, and in 2023 the United States was
the largest oil producer
in history.
The United States also has massive reserves of freshwater:
the Mississippi River System
,
the Inland Waterway
, and some
95,471 miles of shoreline
. We have a large landmass, aren’t in open conflict with our neighbors, and we have oceans to our east and our west.
But more important than these natural resources, the United States is abundant in
the ultimate resource
: people.
Compared to other rich, industrialized nations, the United States
has a big, young, educated population
. Millennials
number 72.1 million
in the United States, and they are being followed by
Gen Z, which numbers 69.6 million
. These two large cohorts have kept
our median age
below the averages of our peers, creating a population pyramid that is far less top-heavy. Sure, our falling birthrate poses challenges, but we won’t be facing the immediate problems gripping countries like Germany, Italy, Japan, and South Korea. They are all aging rapidly and have top-heavy population pyramids, which means social safety nets will have lots of older people and fewer young workers to pay for them. In Japan, just 758,631
babies were born in 2023
, both a 5.1 percent decline from the previous year and the lowest number of births since Japan started compiling the statistics in 1899.
Instead, the U.S. will be among a rarified few countries that are developed and will continue to grow into the near future.
As I’ve written before
, “That cohort is small though, and only includes Canada, Australia, Sweden, New Zealand, Norway, and maybe the United Kingdom. But that’s about it. Every developed country in the world will lose significant populations in the coming decades.” As millennials and Gen Zers age into middle adulthood, the demographic structure of the United States will offer a distinct advantage, maintaining a large base of consumers, investors, and taxpayers that will continue to propel growth.
Despite recent missteps at some high-profile universities,
our education system
still ranks at the top in the world.
Eight of the 10
best schools globally are located in the U.S. Education, along with opportunity, make this country
coveted among immigrants
.
The United States is also home to Silicon Valley, a region still dominant in tech and entrepreneurialism. Despite its flaws, the region is still a place where,
as one commenter explained
, we have “no nostalgia for the old days, because we are always looking to rip the old stuff up and throw it away for something better.”
That constant demand to do better has bred success. Eight of the world’s 10
largest companies by market capitalization
are based in the U.S.
We have abundance. It is a stubborn fact.
The U.S. is exceptional.
I’m also increasingly out of step with my generation because I see 1789 as the founding year of this country.
I’m not here to praise the Founders—they were at best wise barbarians. Instead, I want to recognize the pragmatic brilliance of the Constitution and the culture it created. Ours remains the longest lasting written constitution for a good reason. It is an aspirational document that came from the crucible of argument between
federalists and antifederalists
.
The preamble lays out the challenge: to be better than before, to strive to uphold justice, to maintain internal peace, to provide for national defense, to promote the general welfare, and to secure the freedoms for ourselves and for future generations.
It is from that rootstock that our exceptionalism grew—and yes, I do think the United States is an exceptional country. It’s exceptional because it’s a country built on a set of ideological commitments, which are constantly being fought over in public. Unlike
some who see this country
as a “unique source of incompetence and malevolence,” I still fundamentally believe in the American Experiment. We air our dirty laundry for everyone to see.
No, we haven’t always upheld freedom, liberty, and justice. But each generation’s political leaders are still fighting over these ideologies.
This constant contestation of freedom
, in the words of the historian Eric Foner, remains “America’s strongest cultural bond and its most perilous fault line.”
No country is without its faults, but the United States still embodies those ideals that were set down so many years ago. Liberty and the equality of the individual matter. And more importantly, this is a country where excellence is celebrated.
A better tech-optimism.
None of this is meant to convince you that “
actually things are good!
” Rather, this is a way to make a simple point: I’m fundamentally optimistic about the next 50 years for this country and
Techne
will reflect that optimism.
Tech-optimism has gotten a bad rap—and for good reason. Especially in Silicon Valley, the mindset has
come to express
a “blind faith in the power of technology to cure all ills, and particularly, to create economic growth.” But
Techne
won’t be advancing unbridled, unconstrained optimism. I’m shooting for something more practical and useful.
Psychologists
know people love to read negative articles. Our brains are wired for
pessimism
. Not surprisingly, news articles have gotten more
negative over time
. There is something deep within us all that demands doomerism.
But if you want to get something done, optimism is more productive. This is one place
where researchers agree
: “Optimists are not simply being Pollyannas; they’re problem solvers who try to improve the situation.”
So what can be done to improve our situation? My former colleague
Eli Dourado has laid out some of the action items
:
If we wanted to raise American productivity, for example, we could simplify
geothermal permitting
, deregulate advanced
meltdown-proof nuclear reactors
, make it easier to build
transmission lines
, figure out why high-speed rail is
so expensive
, fix
permitting
generally, abolish
the Jones Act
,
automate
our ports, allow drones to
operate autonomously
, legalize
supersonic flight over land
, reduce
occupational-licensing requirements
, train more
medical workers
,
build more hospitals
, revamp our
pandemic-response institutions
, simplify
drug approvals
,
deregulate land use
to allow denser housing and mixed-use neighborhoods, allow
more immigration
, cancel
inefficient programs
, restrict
cost-plus procurement contracts
in favor of more effective methods, end
appropriations based on job creation
, avoid
political direction of scientific research
, and instill
urgency in grantmaking
.
But there’s more we can do, especially in areas that don’t normally fall into traditional tech policy.
We also need to create opportunities for
anti-aging research
, enhance ecosystems through
wildlife corridors
, replant
seagrass and oyster beds
, channel research dollars to
atomically precise manufacturing
,
develop commercialism in space
,
simplify
regulatory regimes, better understand
how aerosols interact with the climate
,
bring back the
American chestnut, work toward budget-friendly
ultraviolet lights to kill viruses
,
set up moonshots
for carbon sequestration and for sea oxygenation,
eradicate disease-bearing mosquitoes
, eliminate rabies, allow for easy access to
prescription glasses
online and
access telehealth services
, plant trees in targeted areas,
develop cheap metagenomic scanning
, and build desalination plants, just to name a few.
Contemporary tech criticism displays a kind of anti-nostalgia. Instead of being reverent for the past, anxiety for the future abounds. In these visions, the future is imagined as a strange, foreign land, beset with problems.
Techne
won’t be that.
Instead, it will attempt to understand and record the better future that is being built.