PAGE_TITLE: 
	Understanding Why the Supreme Court’s Ruling in Free Speech Coalition v. Paxton Is Narrow | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

With the US Supreme Court now considering in
NetChoice v. Fitch
whether to reinstate an injunction blocking enforcement of Mississippi’s online age-verification and parental-consent
law
, it’s vital to understand the narrowness of the Court’s recent ruling in
Free Speech Coalition v. Paxton
.
The Court in
Free Speech Coalition
upheld, against a First Amendment challenge, a
Texas law
that requires adult websites—those devoting more than one-third of their content to sexual material Texas deems “
harmful to minors
”—to verify all users’ ages. I earlier
described
how the six-justice conservative majority, in an opinion by Clarence Thomas, inventively avoided applying the stringent strict scrutiny test to examine the statute’s constitutionality. The majority instead used the relaxed intermediate scrutiny standard to declare Texas’s law valid.
Via Adobe.
Although ostensibly protecting minors, the outcome is problematic because it requires adults to sacrifice their anonymity and personal information in exchange for accessing speech they have a First Amendment right to receive. Put bluntly by Robert Corn-Revere of the Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression,
the
“ruling limits American adults’ access to only that speech which is fit for children—unless they show their papers first.”
Justice Elena Kagan authored a
dissent
joined by Ketanji Brown Jackson and Sonia Sotomayor. They vehemently rejected the majority’s simultaneous sidestepping of strict scrutiny and fashioning of a new rule for selecting scrutiny in cases where, as Thomas wrote, “the First Amendment
partially
protects speech.” (Emphasis in original.) In short, the majority created a new, government-friendly mechanism for scrutiny determination that gives short shrift to adults’ ability to access content they have a right to view (speech that’s neither
child pornography
nor
obscene
). This workaround from strict scrutiny, however, is extremely limited.
Free Speech Coalition
Doesn’t Affect All Online Age-Verification Statutes
.
The Court in
Free Speech Coalition
examined an online age-verification law in a very specific context. Texas’s statute targets minors’ access to websites and platforms that feature—devote more than one-third of their material to—
sexually explicit content
that minors do
not
have a First Amendment right to view under the Court’s opinion in
Ginsberg v. New York
. In short, Texas’s statute aims
only
at expression the Court in
Free Speech Coalition
called
“obscene to minors” and “age-inappropriate sexual content.”
The very same content, however, is protected for adults’ eyes by the First Amendment. This created a rare situation: The Court had to weigh the burden that can be imposed on the First Amendment rights of
adults
to access speech that’s
lawful
for them against Texas’s interest in blocking
minors
from viewing speech that’s
unlawful
for their eyes.
As Thomas
wrote
, the law’s “apparent purpose is simply to prevent
minors
, who have no First Amendment right to access speech that is obscene to them, from doing so.” (Emphasis in original.) The age-verification mandate thus concentrates narrowly on speech that, as noted above, “the First Amendment
partially
protects” (emphasis in original), given that adults possess a constitutional right to view it (it’s not obscene for them) but minors don’t.
Those are exceedingly significant facts: They readily distinguish the age-verification law upheld in
Free Speech Coalition
from the
one
in
NetChoice v. Fitch
and numerous age-verification and parental-consent statutes that
NetChoice
has successfully
challenged
that broadly restrict minors’ access to (and, importantly, their right to engage in)
fully protected
expression on social media platforms. As the Electronic Frontier Foundation
encapsulates
it, “the Court’s reasoning [in
Free Speech Coalition
] applies only to age-verification rules for certain sexual material, and not to age limits in general.” The American Civil Liberties Union similarly
stresses
that
Free Speech Coalition
is “a limited opinion that does not permit age verification for non-sexual content online.” Indeed, Thomas emphasizes this narrowness, writing that the statute involves “an exercise of Texas’s traditional power to prevent minors from accessing speech that is
obscene from their perspective
.” (Emphasis added.)
Courts must hold this line, confining
Free Speech Coalition
to its narrow factual context—one involving age-verification requirements imposed on adult-oriented sites to block minors from accessing sexually explicit material they don’t have a constitutional right to view. Unfortunately, lawmakers intent on restricting minors’ access to (and ability to engage in) all varieties of
lawful
expression on popular social media platforms will ask judges to stretch
Free Speech Coalition
to apply to
any
online age-verification law. Republican
Jason Anavitarte
, the Georgia State Senate majority leader, already did exactly that,
contending
a federal judge now has “no choice” but to let a
currently enjoined
age-verification and parental-consent statute that sweepingly limits minors’ (and adults’) First Amendment rights and access to social media platforms take effect.
Anavitarte is mistaken.
Free Speech Coalition
is tightly tethered to its partially-protected-speech facts scenario involving sexual content. It does not provide a workaround from strict scrutiny review for all online age-verification statutes and does not give them a constitutional free pass.