PAGE_TITLE: 
	Taking Stock of the Supreme Court’s Upcoming NetChoice Cases, Part II | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

The
Supreme Court
decided
late this past September to examine the
First Amendment
speech rights of social media platforms in the face of recent state mandates compelling them to host content, interfering with how they moderate it, and preventing them from jettisoning political candidates who violate their standards about acceptable speech. The cases of
Moody v. NetChoice
and
NetChoice v. Paxton
involving Florida and Texas statutes, respectively, provide the vehicles for addressing these constitutional concerns.
The
first post
in this two-part series described the issues in the cases and summarized the statutes facing the Court. This post explains why the choice to hear the cases was unsurprising and addresses several matters the Court likely will confront when analyzing them.
Via Adobe Stock
The decision to review the cases was widely expected for several reasons. First, there was a clear disagreement—a
split of authority
—between the 11th and Fifth Circuits regarding the constitutionality of substantially similar content moderation and individualized explanation mandates. Such
circuit splits
up the odds of the Court taking cases. Second, three conservative-leaning justices indicated their willingness to consider the issues in a 2022
opinion
involving the Texas statutes, calling it “not at all obvious how our existing precedents, which predate the age of the internet, should apply to large social media companies.” Third, Justice Clarence Thomas predicted, in a 2021
concurrence
in a
case
about the constitutionality of Donald Trump blocking people from his personal Twitter account while president, that the Court would “soon have no choice but to address how our legal doctrines apply to highly concentrated, privately owned information infrastructure such as digital platforms.” Fourth, as I
explained earlier
, US Solicitor General
Elizabeth Barchas Prelogar
filed
a brief
in August urging the Court to take the cases to resolve the two issues it agreed to review. She weighed in after the Court in January telegraphed its interest in the cases by
inviting
her input.
Now that the Court has accepted the cases, what are some issues it may address in resolving them? A few topics are highlighted below.
Section 230
. The Court agreed to hear only First Amendment questions about content moderation and individualized explanation requirements. It did
not
take any questions regarding
Section 230
of the Communications Decency Act. That
statute
generally shields platforms from liability for content that users post (third-party or user-generated content) while allowing platforms to remove, in good faith, “objectionable” content without facing liability.
But this doesn’t mean Section 230 won’t be addressed. Indeed, Texas
argues
that platforms “cannot simultaneously demand First Amendment
protection
for [the] same conduct” for which they are given statutory protection under Section 230. (Emphasis in original.) Texas elaborates
elsewhere
that the statutory immunity from liability that platforms received under Section 230
is grounded . . . on the factual premise that the Platforms—like telephone companies—are not responsible for the formation of their users’ speech. . . . It is . . . very difficult to square that factual premise with [NetChoice’s] insistence . . . that they have a First Amendment right to control what their users say.
Texas
contends
that “for years, the Platforms have exploited Section 230 to avoid responsibility for user content because they supposedly operated as neutral ‘conduits’ when they host user speech.”
Thus, while the Court didn’t accept a Section 230 question, Texas and Florida likely will inject that statute into the mix, making a “you can’t have your cake and eat it too” argument: that platforms are not simultaneously entitled to both First Amendment protection for their editorial decisions about content and federal statutory immunity from liability for others’ content.
The Right Not to Speak
. The First Amendment’s unenumerated right not to speak—the right not to be compelled by the government to convey disagreeable messages—will be pivotal to the Court’s analysis. That’s because the statutes collectively force platforms to: (1) convey messages that (and host speakers who) violate the platforms’ policies regarding acceptable expression, and (2) thoroughly explain to users why their content was removed. I addressed the right-not-to-speak issue
earlier
and
discussed
how the Court’s June decision in
303 Creative v. Elenis
may be crucial here.
The Print-Newspaper Analogy
. Closely related to the right-not-to-speak issue is whether platforms should possess the same First Amendment rights of editorial control and autonomy that the Court explicitly granted print newspapers in
Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo
. The Court there held that Florida could not compel newspapers to print, free-of-charge, the replies of public-office candidates they had criticized. I’ve addressed
Tornillo’s
potential relevance
elsewhere
.
Finally, the Court must decide the
standard(s) of scrutiny
it will use to evaluate the statutes’ constitutionality. It might adopt a more rigorous standard to evaluate the content-moderation requirements than it does the individual-explanation mandates, thereby rendering the former more likely to be declared unconstitutional.