PAGE_TITLE: 
	Playing the Social Media Blame Game: Lawsuits and Legislation Everywhere | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Reviewing 2023 headlines, it’s clear that social media platforms are today’s whipping boy for almost any ill purportedly plaguing America. When problems arise—
misbehaving school children
,
minors’ mental health issues
, the
spreading of false information
and
hate speech
, or
a horrific mass shooting
—
lawsuits
and
legislation
targeting platforms inevitably follow. That’s bad news for business, consumers, and free expression.
Fueling the fire, President Joe Biden invoked the “B” word (Big, as in Big Tech) nine times in a January
op-ed
, contending that “millions of young people are struggling with bullying, violence, trauma and mental health. We must hold social-media companies accountable for the experiment they are running on our children for profit.”
Via Adobe Stock.
The examples above of this finger-pointing phenomenon indicate eagerness from the government (
public schools
included) and some citizens to pin responsibility on (and seek money from) platforms for others’ actions and complex societal woes. One
law firm
even specializes in suing social media companies, using
products liability theories
to try to dodge
First Amendment
free-speech issues and evade statutory safeguards afforded to platforms for third-party content under the law called
Sec
tion 230
. Briefly, they claim that the design of platforms’ content-recommending algorithms is responsible for harms people supposedly suffer, not the content that others post. Products liability and negligence theories
failed
against the video game industry when it was
blamed for real-world violence
.
The blame-game framing often involves highly sympathetic people (minors and families of the deceased) against deep-pocketed (see Biden’s recurring usage of “Big Tech” to unsubtly pound that point) private enterprises. Those businesses are the same ones
billions
freely choose to use to speak and access speech by connecting with friends, reading news, and watching videos. The president’s op-ed failed to mention the First Amendment.
A timely, related
blame-social-media issue
involves hate speech,
misinformation
, and the presence of violent images on platforms following Hamas’s attack against Israel. X (formerly Twitter) and
TikTok
are bearing
the brunt
of
criticism
. Lawmakers predictably express over-the-top
outrage
. Yet, as AEI’s
Samuel J. Abrams
recently
wrote
, social media has exposed reality, “vividly captured horrors and atrocities committed against the Jewish people by Hamas.” Additionally,
Meta
is
aggressively
“removing praise and substantive support for Hamas from its platforms.”
Then there is public-school
litigation
seeking “financial support for the needed increase in mental health resources at schools.” The
gist
of these
cases
is that allegedly addictive social media applications cause minors mental harms (depression and anxiety) that teachers, in turn, must confront in the classroom. A law firm representing school districts around the country
contends
that defendants, including Meta, Snap, TikTok, and YouTube, “contribute to the youth mental health crisis through [their] algorithms, their marketing approach, and their business strategies.”
Cynically viewed, the school-district plaintiffs view the platforms as lottery-ticket money trains rolling through town, just as some
benefited
from the
Juul settlement
. Furthermore, any buck-stops-here sense of parental or guardian responsibility for their minors’ online activities is missing from the schools’ narrative. More charitably, as trade association
NetChoice
asserted
in response to
Seattle Public Schools’ lawsuit
, “It’s clear from the complaint that this suit is about finding a scapegoat for our problems instead of schools trying to teach kids how to better operate online.” In short, the government (public schools) already possesses the ability to address societal woes through digital literacy education. Such programs can also help people
better sort out misinformation
, although they might not prevent them from sharing it.
Finally, there’s the horrific,
hate-motivated mass killing
of 10 Black people by an 18-year-old white man at a Buffalo supermarket in May 2022. Payton Gendron
pleaded guilty
the past November to “murder, murder as a hate crime, and hate-motivated domestic terrorism” and was
sentenced
this February to
life in prison
without possible parole. At his sentencing, Gendron
said
he “believed what [he] read online and acted out of hate.”
That assertion—linking online
speech
consumption to murderous
conduct
—provides the
entrée for lawsuits
seeking monetary damages from social media companies, blaming them for Gendron’s rampage. A
complaint
, filed in May on behalf of a survivor and the families of three people Gendron killed, contends that defendants (Amazon, Google, Meta, Reddit, and YouTube, among others) “drew Gendron down a rabbit hole of increasingly racist and antisemitic sites, indoctrinating him in white supremacist replacement theory and violent accelerationism” and took “full advantage of the incomplete development of Gendron’s frontal lobe.”
Another lawsuit
was filed in August on behalf of
people who witnessed
the shooting.
These matters involve shifting responsibility and misattributing causation. The government (public schools through lawsuits; legislators via statutes) and, plaintiffs’ attorneys foist responsibility on platforms for harms caused by individuals (Gendron, for example) or, like anxiety and depression, by myriad variables (as I earlier
described
regarding a federal effort to regulate minors’ access to online content).