PAGE_TITLE: 
	Social Media Platforms and Justice Thomas’s Tenacity on Compelled Disclosures and Common Carriers | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Although the
US Supreme Court
recently ruled in three
First Amendment
cases involving social media platforms, Justice Clarence Thomas, its longest-serving member, wrote just once—a separate concurrence in
Moody v. NetChoice
.
Daniel Lyons
recently
explained
that Thomas’s concurrence mostly argued that
facial challenges
violate the case-or-controversy requirement of
Article III
of the US Constitution. That topic arose in
Moody
and the companion case of
NetChoice v. Paxton
because
NetChoice
facially attacked (rather than launching
as-applied challenges
) Florida and Texas statutes that dictate how large platforms moderate content and require them to provide individualized explanations to users who’ve had posts removed or altered. The Court sent the cases back to lower courts to properly apply a facial-challenge analysis (something they hadn’t done).
Via Reuters
Two other points Thomas made—one favorable to platforms, the other less so—merit attention because they could influence how the cases are litigated and decided on remand. Moreover, they demonstrate Thomas’s laudable doggedness in making arguments that haven’t yet captured a majority’s fancy.
Thomas’s
willingness
to “reconsider” the very relaxed standard of judicial review for compelled-disclosure mandates the Supreme Court created in
Zauderer v. Office of Disciplinary Counsel
and that the lower courts applied in
Moody
and
Paxton
bodes well for platforms. Scrapping or confining
Zauderer
while simultaneously heightening the level of review could help not only in challenging Texas’s individualized-explanation mandate (the
US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
upheld
it in
Paxton
under
Zauderer’s
standard), but in
other transparency cases
where states compel platforms to disclose how they moderate controversial varieties of content.
Zauderer
involved a regulation that compelled attorneys’ advertisements to disclose purely factual, uncontroversial information to prevent consumer deception about contingency fee arrangements. In upholding the requirement, the Court
concluded
that mandates compelling factual, uncontroversial information in commercial ads don’t violate the First Amendment
right not to speak
if they: (1) aren’t “unjustified or unduly burdensome,” and (2) “are reasonably related to the [government’s] interest in preventing deception of consumers.”
This standard is exceedingly deferential to the government, lacking the rigor required for laws to survive under either the
intermediate or strict scrutiny
standards of review. Professor
Eric Goldman
argued in a
friend-of-the-court brief
in
Moody
that
Zauderer’s
test applies “only in a narrow set of circumstances” (those tracking
Zauderer’s
facts) and is inappropriate for examining the validity of Florida’s and Texas’s individualized-explanation mandates. Those mandates clearly don’t arise in the context of commercial advertisements for legal services and, as Goldman
wrote
, they “do not fix deceptive omissions in existing ad copy.”
Thomas
explained
in
Moody
that because NetChoice “did not contest
Zauderer
’s applicability before the
Eleventh Circuit
and both lower courts applied its framework, I agree with the Court’s decision to rely upon
Zauderer
at this stage. However, I think we should recon­sider
Zauderer
and its progeny.” Thomas’s “at this stage” language suggests NetChoice should contest
Zauderer’s
applicability when—at the next stage—the cases go back to the lower courts.
Thomas’s beef with
Zauderer’s
test—one he explained 14 years ago in another
concurrence
—is that it gives First Amendment interests short shrift simply because they arise in commercial advertising contexts that compel speech. Laws that
suppress
commercial speech, rather than
compel
it, generally are reviewed under a variant of intermediate scrutiny known as the
Central Hudson test
; it is more demanding than
Zauderer’s
test. In 2010, Thomas
questioned
whether “an entirely different standard of review for regulations that compel, rather than suppress, commercial speech” is justified. This comes
on top of
Thomas’s longstanding struggle “to expand protection for commercial speech.” In sum, Thomas’s
Moody
concurrence now provides an entrée for strengthening judicial scrutiny of individualized-explanation mandates.
The other facet of Thomas’s concurrence deserving attention—one less favorable to platforms—is his continued to desire to decide if large platforms are common carriers. He raised the possibility of—and made a case for—common carrier categorization in his 2021 concurrence in
Biden v. Knight First Amendment Institute
. He explained there that “the long history in this country . . . of restricting the exclusion right of common carriers . . . may save similar regulations today from triggering heightened scrutiny,” adding “there is a fair argument that some digital platforms are sufficiently akin to common carriers . . . to be regulated in this manner.” That designation wouldn’t be good news for platforms’ content-moderation rights.
Thomas
reiterated
variations of this in
Moody
, calling on “both lower courts [to] continue to consider the common-carrier doctrine.” This sharply diverges from Justice Elena Kagan’s majority opinion that never references “common carrier.” Justice Samuel Alito supported Thomas in a concurrence that Thomas and Neil Gorsuch joined,
pointing out
“the majority’s conspicuous failure to address the States’ contention that platforms like YouTube and Facebook . . . should be viewed as common carriers.”