PAGE_TITLE: 
	Forcing Businesses to Rate Their Own Speech: Lessons from a Flawed Texas Statute | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

If lawmakers spent as much time thinking through the
First Amendment
implications of their bills as they do devising acronyms, judges might labor less and states wouldn’t pay the
attorney fees
of plaintiffs who successfully challenge them.
Consider Texas’s
Restricting Explicit and Adult-Designated Educational Resources Act
. That distills to READER Act and, yes, it’s about books and other statutorily undefined public-school “
library material
.” As the
US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
encapsulated it
, the law
requires school book vendors who want to do business with Texas public schools to issue sexual-content ratings for all library materials they have ever sold (or will sell), flagging any materials deemed to be “sexually explicit” or “sexually relevant” based on the materials’ depictions of or references to sex.
Via Shutterstock
Vendors that (1) fail to spend time and money performing the statutorily mandated “
contextual analysis
,” (2) don’t “
weigh and balance
” three state-specified factors in a “
necessarily highly fact-specific
” determination, or (3) simply refuse to issue state-reviewed “
appropriate ratings
” regarding sexual content are barred from “sell[ing] library materials to a school district or open-enrollment charter school.” In brief, vendors must comply with a complicated, nebulous scheme that forces them to speak––by burdensomely rating their content––or else they can’t do business. Furthermore, if they rate their content “sexually explicit,” schools can’t purchase it.
Last August, a coalition of booksellers, publishers, and authors filed a
federal civil rights
complaint
to block enforcement of the textbook-rating mandate. The heart of the plaintiffs’
argument
in
Book People v. Wong
is that the law “compels [them] to express the government’s views, even if they do not agree, and operates as a
prior restraint
, two of the most egregious constitutional infringements.” The plaintiffs assert in their
motion for an injunction
that the law “coerces [them] to express that a book is ‘sexually explicit’ or ‘sexually relevant’ based on the government’s standards with which they disagree.” Additionally, the plaintiffs contend the law’s definitions of “
sexually explicit
” and “
sexually relevant
” material, along with its mandated “contextual analysis,” are
unconstitutionally vague
.
Safeguarding minors commonly justifies censorship efforts, and it does here.
Rep. Jared Patterson
called
“the innocence and safety of our children . . . paramount” when filing Texas
House Bill 900
in March 2023. He ironically
deemed
his now-enjoined handiwork “model legislation for the rest of the nation.” Turning a more sensational sound bite when signing the measure last June, Texas Gov. Greg Abbott
vowed
it would get “trash out of our schools.”
Last month, however, a three-judge panel of the Fifth Circuit unanimously
concluded
the plaintiffs were “likely to succeed on their compelled speech claim” and preliminarily blocked the statute’s enforcement. The panel didn’t need to examine the prior restraint and vagueness arguments.
Lest one think this was some liberal-leaning, pornography-loving bench, the opinion was penned by
Judge Don Willett
, a nominee of Donald Trump and a
native Texan
who was––irony approaching––Abbott’s chief legal adviser when Abbott was Texas’s attorney general. Willett was joined by
Judge Dana Douglas
, a nominee of Joe Biden, and
Judge Jacques Wiener
, a George H. W. Bush nominee.
There are cautionary lessons here for lawmakers who might impose similar self-rating obligations on businesses selling minors video games or companies running minor-frequented social media platforms. Initially, the First Amendment protects sexually explicit content that is neither
obscene
nor
child pornographic
. The READER Act entails rating content that doesn’t rise to the level of those unprotected categories of expression.
Second, the right to not be compelled by the government to express disagreeable viewpoints is powerful. As Justice Samuel Alito wrote for the Supreme Court in
a 2018 opinion
, “measures compelling speech are at least as threatening” as those prohibiting it. Compelled-speech mandates thus are
generally subject to
the rigorous
strict-scrutiny
standard of judicial review.
Third, the work-around from strict scrutiny in compelled-speech cases that the Supreme Court created in
Zauderer v. Office of Disciplinary Counsel
doesn’t apply in cases like
Book People
, despite Texas’s argument to the contrary. That’s because
Zauderer
involved compelling purely factual, noncontroversial information in advertisements to prevent consumer deception. Even if one assumes the ratings are commercial speech, the Fifth Circuit
reasoned
that they
are neither factual nor uncontroversial. The statute requires vendors to undertake contextual analyses, weighing and balancing many factors to determine a rating for each book. Balancing a myriad of factors that depend on community standards is anything but the mere disclosure of factual information.
The court deemed the ratings controversial because “a state representative testified that READER might require vendors to ban a Pulitzer Prize winning novel” and because “the availability of certain books in public-school libraries has been a controversial topic of debate throughout the country.” Even a clever acronym can’t save a backdoor effort at book banning and a red state from becoming a regulatory one.