PAGE_TITLE: 
	Of Drones and Journalists: Balancing Personal Privacy with Press Freedom While Juggling Federal and State Regulations | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

The
US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
recently
rebuffed
a
First Amendment
challenge to a
Texas statute
barring drones from flying over certain locations (critical infrastructure facilities and large sports venues, for instance) and prohibiting drone surveillance from capturing images of private property and people on it. The statute includes 21 exceptions, including for university research and licensed real estate brokers. Absent, however, is one for journalists covering newsworthy events.
Drone laws like Texas’s pit policy concerns about protecting personal privacy, public safety, and national security against safeguarding the press’s interest in gathering news and the public’s right to know via visual imagery. As
Charles D. Tobin
, leader of Ballard Spahr’s
Media and Entertainment Law Group
, recently
stated
, “the First Amendment cannot be left out of the room while discussing drone regulations.”
Via Adobe Stock
Indeed, the First Amendment isn’t always ignored. For example, North Carolina’s regulations include an
exception
allowing drones to capture nonconsensual images of people for purposes of “newsgathering” and covering “newsworthy events.”
The Fifth Circuit reasoned that Texas’s anti-surveillance provisions “are geared only toward protecting
private
individuals and property—they expressly permit aerial surveillance and photography of
public
property and persons thereon.” (Emphasis in original). Unfortunately, this ignores the fact that newsworthy events often occur or affect people on private property, from fires and hurricanes to shootings and hostage situations.
Beyond First Amendment issues, drone laws raise problems of federal-versus-state regulation. At bottom, by upholding Texas’s statute, the Fifth Circuit rejected uniform, national standards established by the
Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) governing commercial drone usage in favor of an uneven, state-by-state (and sometimes municipality-by-municipality) patchwork regulatory structure. That’s the takeaway from its conclusion that federal drone rules do not “occupy the entire field of drone regulation” when it comes to protecting privacy and critical infrastructure.
The FAA enforces
multiple rules
affecting
the commercial use of drones (more formally, small “unmanned aircraft systems” (or UAS) weighing less than 55 pounds). In July 2023, the FAA published a
fact sheet
tackling federal preemption issues regarding state and local drone regulations.
It notes, among many things, that the “FAA has exclusive authority to regulate
aviation safety
and
airspace efficiency
with respect to UAS operations at any altitude” (emphasis added) and that
a privacy-related ban on UAS operations over an entire city would very likely be preempted                                  because it would completely prohibit UAS from using or traversing the airspace above the city and impede the FAA’s and Congress’s ability to safely and effectively integrate UAS into the national airspace.
The latter assertion tracks the 2017
conclusion
of a Massachusetts federal court.
Yet, the FAA permits concurrent federal and state drone regulation in other situations. The 2023
fact sheet
provides that “states and local governments may not regulate in the fields of aviation safety or airspace efficiency
but
generally may regulate outside those fields.” (Emphasis added).
Importantly, carving out journalistic exemptions from state regulations like Texas’s would not leave private citizens remediless. For example, a citizen may sue for aerial
trespass
, with the US Supreme Court
concluding
long ago that while “airspace is a public highway,” a landowner “must have exclusive control of the
immediate reaches
of the enveloping atmosphere.” (Emphasis added).
A Texas appellate court
ruled
in 2002 that aerial trespass occurs when an aircraft “enters into the immediate reaches of the air space next to the land” and “interferes substantially” with a person’s use and enjoyment of their property. That case pivoted on a television news helicopter hovering over a residence to gather images for “a story about the poor condition of rental properties.” The court concluded that “a single ten-minute hover over [the plaintiff’s] property at 300 to 400 feet [did] not . . . rise to the level of ‘substantial interference’ with the use and enjoyment of the underlying land.” In short,
how low
and
how long
are keys for evaluating aerial trespass claims.
Do the FAA’s drone regulations preempt state-law aerial trespass claims? That’s doubtful. The FAA’s July 2023
fact sheet
specifies that state and local “laws that prohibit, restrict, or sanction operations by UAS in the immediate reaches of property to the extent that such operations substantially interfere with the property owner’s actual use and enjoyment of the property” are not likely preempted. Also not likely preempted, according to the FAA, are state and local laws aimed at “harassment of individuals or groups; privacy; voyeurism; [and] trespass on property.” Other viable theories of liability against drone-using journalists—ones I addressed
elsewhere
—include
intrusion into seclusion
and
intentional infliction of emotional distress
.
In sum, state and local governments that insist on creating their own drone regulations should adopt journalistic carveouts to better balance First Amendment interests with the privacy concerns of individuals who already possess multiple remedies for excessive surveillance and undue intrusion.