PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Hidden Dangers of Florida’s Buffer-Zone Bills: Silencing Smartphones and Shielding Police | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

In this spring’s buildup to the May 24
launch
of his presidential campaign, Florida Gov.
Ron DeSantis
signed into law multiple bills that may play well nationally with some conservatives. He inked
Senate Bill 266
,
barring
public colleges and universities from spending government funds to support or promote programs that “advocate for diversity, equity, and inclusion.” DeSantis also signed
a bill
that, subject to limited exceptions,
prohibits
abortions if a “fetus is more than 6 weeks” old. Additionally, he approved
a measure
upping the scope of a
ban
in public schools on instruction about sexual orientation and gender identity, stretching it from kindergarten through third grade (under 2022’s so-called “
Don’t Say Gay
” bill) to prekindergarten through eighth grade.
But two articles of Florida legislation that might have appealed to law-and-order voters—
Senate Bill 1126
and
House Bill 1539
—died in early May, never reaching the governor’s desk. That’s a good thing not only because they were unnecessary in light of extant statutes, but also because they almost certainly would have drawn legal challenges for impinging on the
First Amendment
right to film police performing duties in public places.
Via Reuters
So, what would the two bills have done? They both would have established buffer zones—14 feet per
Senate Bill 1126
and 20 feet via
House Bill 1539
—within which a person could not, after having been warned, approach a first responder (police, firefighters, and emergency medical care providers) lawfully performing a duty if the person did so “with the intent to interrupt, disrupt, hinder, impede or interfere with the first responder’s ability to perform such duty.”  Violating the 14-foot zone would have been a first-degree misdemeanor while breaching the 20-foot halo would have been a second-degree misdemeanor.
Initially, this is legislative overkill since Florida already has a
statute
making it a third-degree felony to willfully obstruct or oppose with violence an officer who is lawfully executing a duty. More relevant, another Florida
law
makes it a first-degree misdemeanor to “resist, obstruct, or oppose any officer” executing their legal duties “
without
[emphasis added] offering or doing violence to the person of the officer.” Importantly, as a Florida appellate court recently
concluded
, “physical obstruction is not required to violate the statute.” In short, neither of the now-dead Florida bills was necessary, given existing laws.
But the bills’ deeper constitutional problem was how they would harm citizens’ use of smartphone technology to capture police abusing their authority. Examples of such deployment abound. George Floyd’s death in Minneapolis in 2020 was captured on video by seventeen-year-old
Darnella Frazier
. The video proved pivotal to Officer Derek Chauvin’s murder conviction, which an appellate court recently
upheld
. In 2015, video of the
fatal shooting
of unarmed Walter Scott by Officer Michael Slager in North Charleston, South Carolina, was taken by twenty-three-year-old
Feidin Santana
as he walked to work.
Today, eight of the nation’s 11 federal circuit courts—the
First
,
Third
,
Fourth
,
Fifth
,
Seventh
,
Ninth
,
Tenth
, and
Eleventh
—recognize that the First Amendment protects citizens recording police doing their jobs in public. While the
US Supreme Court
hasn’t squarely confronted the issue, no federal appellate court that has considered it has rejected such a constitutional right.
But the First Amendment right to record police working in public is not absolute. It’s subject to what one federal appellate court
called
“reasonable restrictions . . . when the circumstances justify them.” The First Circuit stressed that police orders targeting public recording are constitutional only if an officer “can reasonably conclude that the filming itself is interfering, or is about to interfere, with his duties.” Another federal appellate court
notes
that “reasonable time, place, and manner restrictions” may be imposed on the right to record police in public.
That’s another reason why the Florida bills were unnecessary—the First Amendment doesn’t protect people who interfere with officers. Establishing fixed buffer zones of a specified number of feet—something no court has done—provides an inflexible approach where a constitutional right is at stake.
Last September, a federal judge in Arizona
blocked the enforcement
of a
law
keeping people just eight feet from police while recording. As the Arizona Mirror
reported
, the ACLU and journalism organizations from around the state successfully challenged it. The law’s supporters then
decided
not to fight the judge’s order.
All that the Florida bills would have done—beyond generating litigation—would give police more statutes to immediately arrest smartphone-wielding citizens who allegedly were hindering or impeding them, regardless of whether a judge later deemed such allegations devoid of probable cause. In those instances, the damage done to the First Amendment and the public’s right to know about police conduct would be irreversible.