PAGE_TITLE: 
	A Lesson from the Cursing Coach: Scrap the FCC’s Indecency Regime | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

A recent postgame,
profanity-laced interview
on live television highlights flaws in the
Federal Communications Commission’s
(FCC) outdated enforcement regime over racy language and images. It’s a government system that unfairly singles out over-the-air broadcasters for disfavored treatment while simultaneously relying on amorphous definitions to punish them.
Shortly after the University of Michigan secured a crucial
road win
over Pennsylvania State University on November 11, the Wolverines’ interim head football coach
Sherrone Moore
gave a live,
emotional interview
on the Fox broadcast network. Amid tears of joy in triumphing without
suspended coach Jim Harbaugh
, Moore cut loose with
several choice expletives
, spontaneously professing
his feelings
about Harbaugh: “I [expletive] love you, man. I love the [expletive] out of you, man. I did this for you.”
Via Adobe Images
The interview drew
mixed
reviews on X (formerly Twitter), but it also might draw something more serious—the FCC’s wrath. That’s because, under
a federal statute
, the FCC enforces
rules
against over-the-air (
terrestrial
) broadcasters—television and radio—airing indecent content and profane language from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Those rules, the FCC
notes
, “do not apply to cable, satellite TV and satellite radio because they are subscription services.” The rules also aren’t applicable to internet streaming services. In short, had the Michigan–Penn State game been telecast live on ESPN (a cable channel) rather than Fox (a broadcast channel), the FCC couldn’t have acted against ESPN.
Such medium-based delivery distinctions make scant sense today when more than
one-third of all households
get “their TV content solely through a broadband internet connection (BBO homes).” By August 2022, streaming consumption
reportedly
exceeded that of both cable and broadcast, with only 21.6 percent of homes getting their content through over-the-air broadcasting (i.e., a rooftop antenna).
The overwhelming majority of students
I taught
at the University of Florida through 2022 made no distinction between broadcast networks such as ABC, CBS, and NBC and cable channels such as Comedy Central, ESPN, and USA Network. They were born into a world where most people had either a cable or satellite subscription.
The FCC
defines
indecency as “material that, in context, depicts or describes sexual or excretory activities or organs in terms patently offensive as measured by contemporary community standards for the broadcast medium.” In deciphering patent offensiveness, the FCC weighs on a case-by-case basis “
three principal factors
”: (1) the graphicness and explicitness of the language and images used; (2) whether such content was repeated or dwelled upon; and (3) whether it was broadcast for the purpose of pandering to or shocking or titillating the audience.
Little about this standard is clear. As AEI’s
Norman J. Ornstein
explained
in 2006, “the definition of indecency is nowhere near a ‘bright line’ test that broadcasters can rely on.” Such definitional vagueness fosters needless
self-censorship
.
How did we get here? The US Supreme Court, in a 1978
opinion
involving the radio broadcast of comedian George Carlin’s “Filthy Words” monologue,
upheld
the FCC’s power to regulate indecent language. For years thereafter, however, the FCC largely abstained from targeting live and unscripted fleeting expletives.
That changed following
a series of incidents
about 20 years ago. They involved swearing on live awards shows by Cher, Paris Hilton, Nicole Richie, and U2 singer Bono, along with the less-than-one-second exposure of Janet Jackson’s right breast during the February 2004 Super Bowl halftime show. The FCC then
announced
in March 2004 that it was ramping up its enforcement game. Specifically, it would punish as indecent even unintentional, ad-libbed, and fleeting instances of expletives. The FCC also declared any use of the “F-Word,” even when deployed as an intensifier or modifier, “inherently” sexual, thereby rendering it easy pickings for indecency actions. Finally, the commission expanded its religiously oriented definition of profanity beyond “blasphemy or divine imprecation” to broadly sweep up what it now
cryptically calls
“‘grossly offensive’ language that is considered a public nuisance.” That definition is so muddy it makes the
Mississippi
look clear.
Finally, FCC precedent exists for forgiving utterances of live, unscripted expletives by sports figures. In 2013, after the arrest of a suspect later convicted in the
Boston Marathon bombing
, Boston Red Sox slugger David “Big Papi” Ortiz emotionally
told
a Fenway Park crowd, “This is our [expletive] city. And nobody’s going to dictate our freedom. Stay strong.”
Julius Genachowski
, then FCC chairman, quickly took to Twitter to implicitly let
the local radio stations
that had broadcast the game know
they weren’t in trouble
. He
tweeted
: “David Ortiz spoke from the heart at today’s Red Sox game. I stand with Big Papi and the people of Boston—Julius.” Michigan fans surely stand with Moore by that logic. In a fitting coda, Ortiz later
signed a baseball
for Genachowski, inscribed “To Julius: [expletive] awesome.”
It now would be even more awesome if the FCC abandoned its live broadcast indecency and profanity regulations.