PAGE_TITLE: 
	Compelling Speech, Compelling Censorship: California’s Misguided Effort to Protect Minors | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

Safeguarding minors online is essential, but figuring out how to shield them from lawful yet allegedly harmful content in ways that don’t violate the
First Amendment
isn’t easy for legislators fixated on regulating businesses. How, after all, does one define (and prove) what speech is “harmful” and craft a
narrowly tailored statute
that burdens no more speech than is necessary to protect minors?
Via Image Press Agency
In 2022, California lawmakers thought they’d figured out a clever way to dodge these thorny problems with the
California Age-Appropriate Design Code Act
(CAADCA): Foist the burden onto online businesses and deputize them as “censors for the State,” as the
US Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit
aptly
stated
last month in
NetChoice v. Bonta
. Seeing through such shenanigans, the appellate court affirmed a district judge’s preliminary injunction blocking enforcement of the CAADCA’s centerpiece––the compelled creation by online businesses (and compelled disclosure to Attorney General
Rob Bonta
) of “
Data Protection Impact Assessment
” (DPIA) reports.
Although that title benignly suggests the reports are simply about safeguarding data, the reality is they: 1) are unduly burdensome; 2) compel businesses to engage in speech and make “
highly subjective opinions
” about harmful messages, exposure risks, and mitigation measures; 3) let California examine platforms’ design features and algorithms; and 4) get platforms––under threat of significant
civil penalties
––to change features that might risk exposing minors to harmful content, conduct, and contacts. As the unanimous three-judge panel
wrote
, California
attempts to indirectly censor the material available to children online, by delegating the controversial question of what content may ‘harm . . . children’ to the companies themselves, thereby raising further questions about the onerous DPIA report requirement’s efficacy in achieving its goals.
The Ninth Circuit
concluded
NetChoice
would likely succeed on the merits of its First Amendment
facial challenge
to the DPIA mandate’s “vague and onerous” requirement forcing businesses to “opine on and mitigate the risk that children may be exposed to harmful or potentially harmful materials online.” In short, the DPIA provision compels businesses to “measure and disclose to the government . . . the risk that children will be exposed to disfavored speech online.”
In the process of assessing such risks, the
law requires
businesses to address items such as “[w]hether the design of the online product, service, or feature could harm children, including by exposing children to harmful, or potentially harmful, content on the online product, service, or feature.” As I’ve
explained
, statutes and lawsuits targeting social media platforms’ design features are in vogue.
Why wouldn’t a business want to prepare such reports? Professor
Eric Goldman
identifies
multiple reasons, including:
the preparation costs, the bureaucracy and delays [that] slow down product iterations, and the odds that enforcers will use the reports to show either that the business knew there was a risk and didn’t adequately mitigate it or didn’t know there was a risk because they didn’t prepare the DPIA properly.
In blocking enforcement of the DPIA’s risk assessment and mitigation requirements, the Ninth Circuit made three important pro-business, pro-First Amendment determinations. First, it concluded the DPIA mandate is
not
a mere regulation of business conduct involving data management practices that only incidentally involves speech and thus escapes heightened constitutional review. Instead, the court
found
the “primary effect of the DPIA provision is to compel speech,” thus triggering examination under the First Amendment’s “well-established” line of
right-not-to-speak cases
.
Second, the appellate court deemed the DPIA mandate subject to the most rigorous level of First Amendment analysis––
strict scrutiny
. The court
said
the mandate “regulates far more than commercial speech” and thus was not subject to the less stringent
Central Hudson test
.
Third, the court
concluded
that even if one assumes California “has a compelling interest in protecting children from ‘being pushed . . . unwanted material, such as videos promoting self-harm,’ as the State itself contends,” the DPIA mandate likely fails strict scrutiny because it is not
narrowly tailored
to serve that interest. Under the narrow-tailoring facet of strict scrutiny, courts examine whether there are alternative methods of serving a state’s compelling interest that would be effective and burden less speech. The Ninth Circuit
found
three: “(1) incentivizing companies to offer voluntary content filters or application blockers, (2) educating children and parents on the importance of using such tools, and (3) relying on existing criminal laws that prohibit related unlawful conduct.” The DPIA mandate thus is “unnecessary for fostering a proactive environment in which companies, the State, and the general public work to protect children’s safety online.”
Ultimately, as NetChoice’s
Chris Marchese
stated
, the Ninth Circuit “recognized that California’s government cannot commandeer private businesses to censor lawful content online or to restrict access to it.” More simply, the court delivered what
Techdirt’s
Mike Masnick
called
“a nice victory for free speech.”