PAGE_TITLE: 
	Taking Stock of the Supreme Court’s Upcoming NetChoice Cases, Part I | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

On September 29, the
US Supreme Court
agreed
to review
facets of two largely conflicting federal court rulings—
Moody v. NetChoice
from the US Court of Appeals for the
11th Circuit
and
NetChoice v. Paxton
from the
5th Circuit
—affecting social media platforms’
First Amendment
speech rights. The justices will settle (likely in June 2024) those courts’ disagreement about the constitutionality of similar Florida and Texas laws that force platforms to host content and users against their will and individually explain content-removal decisions.
At stake in the
NetChoice
cases is the very freedom of platforms as private enterprises to decide for themselves, without government interference and compulsion, (1) the types of content they allow and prohibit; (2) how they curate, present, and remove content; and (3) when to ban users and how to explain to them decisions about removing of their content. The platforms’ editorial control and autonomy to create, maintain, and evolve the speech-based communities they desire—not ones the government paternalistically deems desirable—is on the line.
Via Adobe Stock
This post, the first of a two-part series, summarizes the issues and statutes the Supreme Court will examine. The second post will explain why the Court’s decision to hear the cases was unsurprising and will identify some statutes, questions, and concepts the justices might address—in passing or at length—in the cases. These subjects include: (1)
Section 230
of the Communications Decency Act, (2) the First Amendment
right not to speak
, (3) the analogy between the editorial rights of social media platforms and those of print newspapers that the Court detailed in
1974
, (4) the possible
standards of scrutiny
for evaluating the constitutionality of Florida and Texas’s statutes, and (5) the role that
text and history
might play for some Justices.
Regarding the legal issues, the Court accepted two questions that U.S. Solicitor General
Elizabeth Barchas Prelogar
urged it to consider in an August-filed
brief
. They involve whether the “content-moderation restrictions” and the “individualized-explanation requirements” imposed on large social media platforms by Florida and Texas violate the platforms’ First Amendment right to free speech. In other words, do state statutory mandates and obligations compelling expression and dictating how to arrange it violate the First Amendment?
The 11th Circuit
concluded
in May 2022 that it was “substantially likely” that both sets of Florida’s requirements (content moderation and individualized explanation) were unconstitutional, affirming a trial court’s
preliminary injunction
blocking their enforcement. Conversely, the Fifth Circuit
determined
several months later that similar Texas mandates were constitutional because they “neither [compelled] nor obstruct[ed] the Platforms’ own speech in any way.” It therefore reversed a trial court’s contrary
decision
.
What do the content-moderation statutes require? They compel platforms to host content and users they otherwise wouldn’t while also interfering with the platforms’ editorial choices about how to arrange content.
For example, a Florida
statute
prevents
large social media platforms
(those with $100 million or more in annual gross revenue or “at least 100 million monthly individual platform participants globally”) from
deplatforming
(permanently banning or suspending for more than 14 days) legally qualified candidates for state or local office in the Sunshine State. A candidate thus can flout and break, once or repeatedly, a platform’s policies regarding acceptable content (for instance, Facebook’s bans on “
hate speech
” and “
particularly violent or graphic
” content) without fear of being kicked off. Platforms that violate the
statute
for statewide candidates can be fined a whopping
$250,000 per day
.
Another Florida
statute
interferes with platforms’ editorial judgment about how to arrange “content and material” that is either by or about candidates in users’ feeds and search results. It does so by banning “
post-prioritization
” algorithms that otherwise helpfully organize content, much like newspapers prioritize articles where they appear in a paper and on a page. Under the same statute, platforms cannot “
censor
,
deplatform
, or
shadow ban
a
journalistic enterprise
based on the content of its publication or broadcast.” (Emphasis added.) The
statute
defines the italicized terms.
A Texas
statute
bans platforms with
more than 50 million
active monthly users from
censoring
“a user, a user’s expression, or a user’s ability to receive the expression of another person based” on the user’s viewpoint or viewpoint expressed by the user. A
related statute
creates some carveouts for censorship, but it doesn’t apply to sexist, racist, and anti-LGBTQ viewpoints or to religious bigotry, be it anti-Semitic or anti-Catholic. Platforms can’t remove such valueless, hateful expression unless the posts directly incite criminal activity or specifically threaten violence.
Collectively, the “
individualized-explanation requirements
” in
Florida
and
Texas
compel platforms to provide thorough, personalized explanations to users about why their content was removed. As Prelogar
asserted
, “the sheer volume of content removal that the platforms undertake makes it impracticable for the businesses to comply with those mandates.” Texas also requires a burdensome
appeals process
.