PAGE_TITLE: 
	The Supreme Court Must Protect Businesses from Bullying Governmental Efforts to Censor Citizens’ Dissenting Viewpoints | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

The
US Supreme Court
agreed
on October 20 to resolve whether multiple federal government officials, departments, and agencies violated the
First Amendment
when they vigorously lobbied social media companies to remove or suppress conservative-tilting content that, among other things, questioned the efficacy of COVID-19 mask mandates, shutdowns, and vaccines.
The case of
Murthy v. Missouri
(formerly
Missouri v. Biden
) is, as I
explained earlier
, rife with political tension. It pivots on just how far the government may go in so-called
jawboning
(trying to informally persuade and convince) platforms to remove otherwise constitutionally protected speech before the government’s efforts amounts to unlawful coercion and censorship. The
central issue
the Court will examine is whether the government’s censorial lobbying efforts “transformed private social-media companies’ content-moderation decisions into
state action
and violated [the plaintiffs’] First Amendment rights.”
Via Adobe Stock
The political tension was manifest on October 20 when three conservative-leaning Justices (Samuel Alito, Neil Gorsuch, and Clarence Thomas) objected to the majority’s decision not to enforce—at least until the Court rules on the matter—a lower-court
injunction
prohibiting multiple
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
,
Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency
,
FBI
,
Surgeon General
, and
White House
officials from trying to “coerce or significantly encourage a platform’s content-moderation decisions.” The
US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
had deemed that injunction necessary because it determined that the government officials had “engaged in a broad pressure campaign designed to coerce social-media companies into suppressing speakers, viewpoints, and content disfavored by the government.”
Alito, Gorsuch, and Thomas
dissented
from the Court’s decision to put that injunction on hold, calling the move “highly disturbing.” Writing for the trio, Alito reasoned that:
the injunction does not prevent any Government official from speaking on any matter or from urging any entity or person to act in accordance with the Government’s view of responsible conduct. The injunction applies only when the Government crosses the line and begins to coerce or control others’ exercise of their free-speech rights.
Clearly recognizing the left-versus-right politics and perceptions baked into the battle, Alito added that
“At this time in the history of our country, what the Court has done, I fear, will be seen by some as giving the Govern­ment a green light to use heavy-handed tactics to skew the presentation of views on the medium that increasingly dom­inates the dissemination of news.”
If one were reading the tea leaves­­—risky business when it comes to predicting how Justices might rule—it seems the Alito-Gorsuch-Thomas bloc is likely to adopt a stringent standard that closely cabins the government’s persuasive efforts. Alito’s contention in the bloc’s dissent that “Government censorship of private speech is antithetical to our democratic form of government” adds credence to this prognostication. The question then becomes whether the more centrist-oriented Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. and Justice Brett Kavanaugh will join the trio, perhaps along with the more right-situated Justice Amy Coney Barrett. We likely won’t know for at least six months, with Alito pointing out that a decision “may not occur until late in the spring of next year.”
Ultimately, liberals tend to view the case as about protecting the government’s ability to encourage platforms to remove falsities, misinformation, and content that threatens public health, national security, and election integrity. As an
NPR story
recently framed it,
The case has profound implications for almost every aspect of American life, especially at a time when there are great national security concerns about false information online during the ongoing wars in the Middle East and Ukraine and further concerns about misinformation online that could cause significant problems in the conduct of the 2024 elections.
Conversely, conservatives perceive the case to be about the Biden administration coercing platforms to remove or bury viewpoints and information that don’t fit the government’s preferred narrative. As Missouri Attorney General Andrew Bailey
posted
on X (formerly known as Twitter) shortly after the Court announced its decision to hear the case, “We look forward to dismantling Joe Biden’s vast censorship enterprise at the nation’s highest court.”
The
Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression
lauded
the Supreme Court’s decision to hear the case. It asserted that “to protect freedom of expression, the government’s efforts to ‘jawbone’ private platforms into granting government officials a role in decisions about content moderation must fail.”
Two major problems with unfettered jawboning are, as I wrote
elsewhere
, “its lack of public transparency and the absence of procedural guardrails” that would be present either in court or through the legislative process. Jawboning, I’ve
pointed out
, “allows the government to informally implement its policy objectives without needing to clear the high hurdles of the legislative process.” Similarly, government officials needn’t grapple with the substantive First Amendment doctrines and tests they’d have to overcome if a law affecting speech were challenged in court.
As they used to say in the halcyon days of broadcasting, long before social media cases like this were imaginable, stay tuned.