PAGE_TITLE: 
	Free Speech and Tech Policy at the US Supreme Court, 2025 | American Enterprise Institute - AEI

VIDEO
Event Summary
On July 9, AEI hosted an expert panel examining the Supreme Court’s decision in
Free Speech Coalition v. Paxton
, along with broader issues related to online expression, regulatory authority, and technology policy.
AEI’s Clay Calvert opened the discussion by outlining the facts of
Free Speech Coalition v. Paxton
, summarizing the majority opinion, and explaining how the dissent would have applied strict scrutiny. Panelists then offered their initial reactions to the ruling and discussed its potential implications for the future of online free speech.
The conversation began with an overview of First Amendment principles the Court appeared to reinterpret or newly articulate, with panelists debating whether these developments signal a lasting shift in the Court’s free speech doctrine.
Kate Ruane, director of the Free Expression Project at the Center for Democracy and Technology, centered her remarks on the recent TikTok ban ruling, describing the Court’s rationale and subsequent developments.
Corbin Barthold, internet policy counsel at TechFreedom, and AEI’s Daniel Lyons continued the discussion by examining the First Amendment dimensions of other recent Supreme Court decisions, including the prospect of a jawboning sequel to
Murthy v. Missouri
.
The event concluded with a Q&A.
—Julia Torres
Event Description
New Supreme Court decisions are reshaping the boundaries of online free expression. Recently, the Court considered a Texas law requiring age-verification mandates and compelled the use of warnings on adult websites, raising key questions about the government’s role in regulating digital platforms and the burdens that can be placed on adults to access lawful content in the interest of safeguarding minors.
Join as a panel of experts discusses how this fits into a growing body of case law addressing the government’s attempts to regulate online content and influence platforms’ policies and content. The event will also examine the Supreme Court’s 2025 TikTok ban ruling, what has unfolded since then, and whether current Federal Communications Commission and Federal Trade Commission pressure on media companies could lead to a “jawboning” sequel to
Murthy v. Missouri
.
Event Materials
Event Transcript